---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (12/12/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for December 12th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-12-12 15:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **3 new cases** reported on December 12th.

Community deaths among confirmed cases raises the risk of further disease spread. A mass vaccination campaign is expected for the Biakato Mines region as vaccination continues in the DRC and neighboring countries.

Technical Secretary of the Ebola response technical committee (CMRE), Prof. Jean-Jacques Muyembe, visited injured patients from the Biakato attacks in Goma on 11 December.

### Recommended reading:

[For Ebola survivors in Congo, stigma and mental health issues loom large<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/news-feature/2019/12/11/Ebola-mental-health-survivors-stigma-trauma-psychosocial-Congo?utm_source=Global+Health+NOW+Main+List&utm_campaign=38a1552197-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2019_12_11_01_27&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_8d0d062dbd-38a1552197-3009629){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of December 12)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,340**

* Confirmed cases: 3,225
* Probable cases: 118
* Suspected cases: 441

**Deaths: 2,210**

**Vaccinated**:

* **256,751** (Merck Vaccine)
* **1,532** (J&J Vaccine)

## DRC records 10 new Ebola cases as WHO fights resurgence

[_CIDRAP_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2019/12/drc-records-10-new-ebola-cases-who-fights-resurgence){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_12/11/19_

The DRC recorded 10 new Ebola cases on Wednesday, a double-digit jump which has not been seen since mid-September. This steep increase is largely due to severe violence in the eastern regions of the DRC which has disrupted the Ebola response. Seventy percent of new cases are in known contacts, and the proportion of community deaths among confirmed cases has risen to 20%, up from the previous week's 9%. Community deaths raise the risk of further disease spread. In an update posted late Tuesday, the DRC's Ebola response technical committee (CMRE) said three of the six cases recorded that day involved traditional healers. Vaccination with two Ebola vaccines continues in the DRC and neighboring countries. It is not yet known which vaccine is being proposed for use in Biakato Mines.

## Situation Épidémiologique: 11 Décembre 2019

[_DRC CMRE_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://mailchi.mp/f89296c380c5/situation-pidmiologique-du-16-novembre-3810521?e=25d9d25807){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_12/11/19_

The Technical Secretary of the Ebola response technical committee (CMRE), Prof. Jean-Jacques Muyembe, visited injured patients from the Biakato attacks in Goma on 11 December. This is the second time he has gone to visit survivors of attacks. Muyembe was accompanied by the general coordinator of CMRE, Prof. Steve Ahuka Mundeke, and his two communications officers. A total of seven wounded have been hospitalized in the center since 28 November.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Emanuele Capobianco – 12/12/19

[@ecapobianco<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/ecapobianco/status/1205052691346579456){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

@IFRC is hosting @WHOGOARN Steering Committee. In our auditorium the best experts in epidemic readiness & response are discussing #Ebola & other outbreaks. This is timely as today #RCRC19 will hopefully adopt a landmark resolution on epidemic preparedness & response. #ifrc100

### Tweet by Dr. Ali Khan – 12/12/19

[@UNMC_DrKhan<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/UNMC_DrKhan/status/1205050426472779776){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

\#Ebola outbreak brief by Dr. Michael Yao, Incident manager, DRC. Cornered in 4 health zones, more tools (vaccine & therapeutics), security challenge, person mobility. 95% of response is brave Congolese. Dropping protocol to vaccinate high risk areas! @DrMikeRyan @patdrury

### Tweet by Helen Branswell – 12/11/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1204782783937294344){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

This is price of violence in the North Kivu #Ebola outbreak. There were 10 cases reported yesterday. The last time the case count rose by double digits was in September, during violence at Lwemba that also suspended containment work.

Such a tragedy.