---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (11/8/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for November 8th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-11-08 16:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **no new case** reported on November 7th.

While the number of new cases is consistent with the weekly average of 19 confirmed cases in the past 21 days, there is notable daily fluctuation of cases.

More than 100 motorcycle taxi drivers and their family members received the Ebola vaccine in Beni, after 3 new cases this week were linked to a motorcycle taxi driver.

### Recommended reading: 

[The race to contain the new Ebola epidemic<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://thehill.com/changing-america/well-being/465688-the-race-to-contain-the-new-ebola-epidemic){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of November 7)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,286**

* Confirmed cases: 3,168
* Probable cases: 118
* Suspected cases: 531

**Deaths: 2,191**

**Vaccinated**: **248,004**

## Ebola virus disease – Democratic Republic of the Congo

[_WHO_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.who.int/csr/don/07-november-2019-ebola-drc/en/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_11/7/19_

Violence this week in Lwemba, Mandima, caused the death of an Ebola response community health worker and left his spouse critically injured; WHO and partners condemned the attack. During the past 21 days, most reported cases have been from four health zones: Mandima (39%), Mabalako (31%), Beni (11%), and Mambasa (11%). The vast majority (83%) of these cases were linked to Biakato Mines Health Area in Mandima. Approximately half of the cases reported in the past 21 days were located outside of the health zone where they had got infected, with the majority of these movements going to or coming from Mandima.

While the relatively lower case incidence observed is encouraging, it must be interpreted with caution as the situation remains highly contingent upon the level of access and security within affected communities. Concurrent with the decline in cases, there was a shift in hotspots from urban settings to more rural, hard-to-reach communities, within a more concentrated geographical area. These areas bring additional challenges to the response. In such environments, risks of resurgence remain very high, as do the risks of re-dispersion of the outbreak with cases travelling outside of hotspots to seek healthcare or for other reasons. These risks continue to be mitigated by substantial response and preparedness activities.

## Beni: One hundred motorcycle taxi drivers and their families vaccinated against Ebola

[_Koma Ebola via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/11/beni-one-hundred-motorcycle-taxi-drivers-and-their-families-vaccinated-against-ebola.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_11/7/19_

Motorcycle taxi drivers in Beni accepted the Ebola vaccine after the death of one of their colleagues at a Beni treatment center. They committed themselves again to accompany the teams of the response against Ebola assigned to Beni. During the sensitization session that followed the vaccination, it was revealed that more than 20 bikers have been the most affected by the epidemic in recent weeks, since they are in contact with everyone at multiple times.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Ibrahima Socé Fall– 11/8/19

[@DamelSoceFall<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DamelSoceFall/status/1192804525591191553){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

\#Kalunguta #Butembo!

First #Ebola case reported in August 29th, 2018. Today, the last Ebola confirmed case for now, is being discharged. This is the first time after 15 months with no case in all ETCs ETUs of Butembo sub-coordination. congrats to the team!

### Tweet by WHO African Region– 11/7/19

[@WHOAFRO<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/WHOAFRO/status/1192543731741863950){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

‏Light of the World is a band led by 23 year old Mapenzi Kivukutu, in #Mangina, #DRC. They organize #Ebola awareness concerts.

“It's a joy to see children responding positively. They are not only adopting new hygiene habits but also influencing their families,” Mapenzi says.