---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (12/19/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for December 19th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-12-19 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **3 new cases** reported on December 19th.

The United Nations Security Council has voted to renew the mandate of the peacekeeping mission to the DRC (MONUSCO) through December 2020.

### Recommended Viewing 

[Partners In Health Co-Founder Dr. Paul Farmer on Fighting Ebola in Africa since 2014](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/videos/2019-12-19/partners-in-health-co-founder-dr-paul-farmer-on-fighting-ebola-in-africa-since-2014-video)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

### Recommended Reading

[The Current Ebola Outbreak and the U.S. Role: An Explainer by KFF](https://www.kff.org/global-health-policy/issue-brief/the-current-ebola-outbreak-and-the-u-s-role-an-explainer/)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of December 19)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,354**  
 - Confirmed cases: 3,236  
 - Probable cases: 118

\- Suspected cases: 488

**Deaths: 2,217**

**Vaccinated**:

\-**257,953** (Merck Vaccine)

\-**2,381** (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

## [UNSC renews peacekeeping mission in DRC](http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2019-12/20/c_138643968.htm)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_Xinhua, 12/19/19_

The UN Security Council voted to renew the mandate of the peacekeeping mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for another year. Resolution 2502, adopted unanimously by the council, extended the mandate known as MONUSCO until Dec. 20, 2020. MONUSCO took over from an earlier UN peacekeeping operation in the DRC on July 1, 2010. The France-drafted resolution maintained the dual strategic priorities of the mission: protection of civilians and supporting the stabilization and strengthening of the DRC state institutions. It has been authorized to protect civilians, humanitarian personnel and human rights defenders and to support the government of the DRC in its stabilization and peace consolidation efforts.

## [Democratic Republic of the Congo releases Revised One International Appeal](https://reliefweb.int/report/democratic-republic-congo/democratic-republic-congo-revised-one-international-appeal-ebola-0)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_ReliefWeb, 12/19/19_

Given the continued transmission of Ebola virus disease, ongoing challenges with security in Democratic Republic of Congo it is crucial to maintain vigilance and dedicated preparedness and response actions. Aligned with this reality, the 5th revision of the One International Appeal extends the response phase of the operation until 30 June 2020, with a recovery phase up through to 31 December 2020, to ensure a strong transition focused on local ownership and supporting ongoing efforts to strengthen epidemic readiness and response in the affected countries. This revised OIA seeks a total of some 61 million Swiss francs, increased from CHF 43 million, to enable the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement to continue supporting the Democratic Republic of the Congo Red Cross to deliver assistance and support the response to and containment of the current Ebola outbreak in the DRC. The plan focuses on the community-led response across each of the pillars in the operation. It reflects the current situation and information available at this time of the operation but will be adjusted as necessary based on further developments and ongoing assessment of epidemic dynamics, community needs, and response capacities.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by La France à l'ONU](https://twitter.com/franceonu/status/1207680191734124545)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 12/19

@franceonu

UNANIMOUSLY! The Security Council renews the mandate of the @MONUSCO for 1 year, thus contributing to the protection of civilians and the stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. #RDC