---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (8/21/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for August 21st, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-08-21 15:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **18 new cases** as of August 20th.

Control measures have been strengthened at the DRC-Burundi border.

The European Union (EU) is stepping up assistance to Burundi with $516,000 to strengthen its fight against Ebola.

Yesterday armed men resembling the Mai-Mai militia attacked the Kambuli Health Center in Butembo. No casualties were noted.

### Recommended reading:

[How outbreaks like Ebola extract huge social and economic costs<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://theconversation.com/how-outbreaks-like-ebola-extract-huge-social-and-economic-costs-121832){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 2,927**

* Confirmed cases: 2,822
* Probable cases: 105
* Suspected cases: 347

**Deaths: 1,953**

**Vaccinated**: **198,076**

## South Kivu: Enhanced Ebola control measures at the Kavimvira border

[_Radio Okapi via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/08/south-kivu-enhanced-ebola-control-measures-at-the-kavimvira-border.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/21/19_

The number of people leaving the DRC to Burundi by post Kavimvira, South Kivu has increased from 800 to 1300 per day since last weekend. Travelers from Mwenga, who recently experienced difficulties on their way to Rwanda, have headed for the DRC-Burundian border from Kavimvira to Gatumba. long queues have been observed these days at the exit counters in the morning. A new handwashing device was installed for vehicle drivers, in addition to the old one that was made available to passengers and other travelers. The border health postmaster, Jonas Mafresi Mwanawabene, says the control measures is fraught with difficulties. He mentioned that certain devices are still needed, and a water problem still persists in the area. He also said that the vaccine is not yet available in Kavimvira.

## EU steps up support to Burundi for fight against Ebola

[_Anadolu Agency_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.aa.com.tr/en/health/eu-steps-up-support-to-burundi-for-fight-against-ebola/1561508){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Diyar Guldogan, 8/21/19_

"To effectively fight the Ebola virus we do not only have to address the affected cases in the Democratic Republic of Congo but also increase our efforts to prevent the disease from spreading to neighbouring countries like Burundi," EU Commissioner Christos Stylianides said in a statement on Wednesday. No Ebola cases have been detected in Burundi, but the threat has become increased, with the newly confirmed cases in South Kivu, DRC.

## Butembo : Des dégâts matériels enregistrés dans une incursion rebelle au Centre de santé Kambuli

[_7sur7_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://7sur7.cd/2019/08/20/butembo-des-degats-materiels-enregistres-dans-une-incursion-rebelle-au-centre-de-sante){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/20/19_

During the attack, the armed men vandalized many properties at the Kambuli Health Center, including the destruction on Ebola Prevention Kits, witnesses mentioned. The municipal authority of the Musasa area of Butembo reminded residents to remain calm, reassuring them of the security forces and defense deployed to the region.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Amy Maxmen– 8/21/19

[@amymaxmen<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/amymaxmen/status/1164192760611536901){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Deeper than our neglect of #Ebola is the world's disregard for Congo. "Unless we address its root causes — the weak health system, the insecurity, and the political instability — there will be another outbreak.” says @DrTedros in this @statnews piece.

### Tweet by Laurie Garrett– 8/20/19

[@Laurie_Garrett<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/Laurie_Garrett/status/1163972162245603328){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

The geography of #Ebola is expanding rapidly. This outbreak started a year ago in a tight zone, but now spans an area over 500 miles. Its knocking on Rwanda's doors.