---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (11/6/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for November 6th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-11-06 16:45:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **3 new cases** reported on November 5th.

There were 2 new confirmed deaths in North Kivu, including **1 community death** in Beni.

David Gressly addresses some noteworthy advances in the fight against Ebola during his visit to Butembo on Monday.

More than sixty communication service agents in the Ebola response to Butembo, North Kivu, demand payment of three months' salary arrears.

### Recommended reading: 

[Attacks on Ebola Response 15 - 31 October 2019<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://insecurityinsight.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/EN-15-31-October-2019-Information-Alert-Attacks-on-Ebola-Response.pdf){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of November 5)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,285** 

* Confirmed cases: 3,167
* Probable cases: 118
* Suspected cases: 542

**Deaths: 2,187**

**Vaccinated**: **247,013**

## David Gressly salutes 'significant advances' in the fight against Ebola

[_Koma Ebola via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/11/david-gressly-salutes-significant-advances-in-the-fight-against-ebola.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_11/6/19_

David Gressly during a press conference praised the "significant progress" recorded in the fight against Ebola in the different health zones of North Kivu. However, much remains to be done so that this epidemic is completely eradicated, he put in perspective. Faced with the security challenges noted in the Mambasa territory in Ituri with the murder last weekend of a journalist at Lwemba, Gressly announced a possible deployment of peacekeepers to enhance security. This deployment aims to strengthen the security of the response teams in this area.

## DRC: More than 60 Ebola response communicators demand salaries

[_Radio Okapi via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/11/drc-more-than-60-ebola-response-communicators-demand-salaries.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_11/6/19_

According to their spokesman, Anselme Bulio, all the communicators of the twelve health zones of the Butembo sub-coordination are concerned by this problem. "We waited for three months because the coordination made us firm promises. But since then, nothing is done," he said. They granted 48 hours, which expires on Thursday, 7 November, to the coordination of response, to regularize this situation. Otherwise, they promise to go on strike. "Since there are no more cases in the Butembo sub-coordination, we feel that we do not want to pay our arrears of three months’ salary. That's why we maintain our demands to be paid," said Bulio. The Butembo Ebola Response Coordinator, John Kombe, did not want to respond to this concern, as he believed that it is up to the mayor of the city, as an urban authority, to respond to these concerns.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Crawford Kilian– 11/6/19

[@Crof<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/Crof/status/1192116854862442496){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Beni: Three new confirmed cases of #Ebola virus disease

### Tweet by Emilio Mordini– 11/6/19

[@emiliomordini<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/emiliomordini/status/1192116481175302144){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

‏New transmission model for Ebola predicted Uganda cases | @scoopit