---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (11/22/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for November 22nd, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-11-22 16:01:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **1 new case** reported on November 22nd.

Eight new confirmed cases were reported in the past week (15 to 22 November).

Ebola response operations were suspended in Beni and disrupted in Butembo on Wednesday, following an attack on civilians.

An Ebola death unlinked to any chain of transmission risks reversing major gains against the epidemic, which is now down to just a handful of cases.

### Recommended reading: 

[Global health equity is needed to prevent an Ebola pandemic<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.ft.com/content/8395e12c-0ba5-11ea-8fb7-8fcec0c3b0f9){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of November 22)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,299**

* Confirmed cases: 3,181
* Probable cases: 118
* Suspected cases: 423

**Deaths: 2,196**

**Vaccinated**:

* **254,768** (Merck Vaccine)
* **373** (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

## New violence suspends Ebola response in key hot spots

[_CIDRAP_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2019/11/new-violence-suspends-ebola-response-key-hot-spots){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Stephanie Soucheray, 11/21/19_

As the Ebola outbreak wanes, WHO officials have warned that the DRC could see a resurgence at any point. Over the past 15 months, case counts have spiked following violent attacks as surveillance has been slowed and new transmission chains have been allowed to take hold in communities. Mike Ryan, the World Health Organization (WHO) executive director of health emergencies, [warned](https://twitter.com/DrMikeRyan/status/1197578199422648325) that violence always increases the risk of further transmission of the virus. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO director-general, tweeted, "Deeply troubled by developments in DRC. We have seen these violent events not only traumatize communities and responders but also expand the Ebola outbreak. Our teams cannot reach contacts or potential patients when access is limited."

## WHO sounds alarm on Ebola due to Congo insecurity

[_Reuters_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://uk.reuters.com/article/us-health-ebola-congo/who-sounds-alarm-on-ebola-due-to-congo-insecurity-idUKKBN1XW1RS){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Stephanie Nebehay, 11/22/19_

Islamist militiamen killed at least 19 people in eastern DRC, stepping up attacks on civilians in response to a military campaign against them in border areas with Uganda. The assailants, who the officials said belong to the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), a Ugandan Islamist group, burned down a Catholic church near the city of Oicha. “The difficulty we collectively face at the moment is just when we need that unlimited and unfettered access to communities we have lost that access in key areas,” Mike Ryan said in a news briefing.

A male driver died of Ebola in Oicha, North Kivu province, after visiting three health care centers, Ryan said, adding that many other drivers had handled the body at the funeral. This case has generated more than 360 contacts. “**What I am highlighting is the fact that we are so close to finishing, that if we lose this opportunity we are going to be dealing with that reality for months to come**,” Ryan said. “By the time this Ebola outbreak in Congo is over the international community will probably have spent $1 billion.”

## Twitter

### Tweet by Laurie Garrett– 11/21/19

[@Laurie_Garrett<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/Laurie_Garrett/status/1197607241190432768){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

The real danger for health workers battling #Ebola in #DRC is bullets, machetes and arson.....

### Tweet by David Gressly– 11/21/19

[@DavidGressly<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1197771028870631424){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

It is essential that response teams are provided safe access at all times to continue their hard work protecting communities against the deadly #Ebola virus. We are making great progress. Let’s end this outbreak together! #OnEstEnsemble #StopEbola