---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (12/18/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for December 18th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-12-18 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **no new cases** reported on December 18th.

The recent case which officials feared was a reinfection has been declared a resurgence instead. David Gressly, the United Nations Deputy Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, met today with community leaders and Aloya police to discuss improving the security situation in Ebola affected areas.

### Recommended reading

Democratic Republic of Congo: [Ebola Virus Disease - External Situation Report 72](https://reliefweb.int/report/democratic-republic-congo/democratic-republic-congo-ebola-virus-disease-external-situation-87)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of December 18)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,349**

* Confirmed cases: 3,231
* Probable cases: 118

\- Suspected cases: 519

**Deaths: 2,214**

**Vaccinated**:

\-**257,667** (Merck Vaccine)

\-**2,381** (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

## [Experts breathe sigh of relief as WHO say Ebola patient was not reinfected with the deadly disease](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/global-health/science-and-disease/experts-breathe-sigh-relief-say-ebola-patient-not-reinfected/)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_The Telegraph, 12/17/19_

There is relief in Democratic Republic of Congo as authorities have said that a man thought to be reinfected with the Ebola virus was in fact suffering from a “resurgence” of the disease - that is, the virus was still lurking in his immune system. There was alarm last week among experts when the first reports came through that a patient had died after catching the deadly virus a second time - a case of reinfection with Ebola has never been documented and survivors are thought to be immune. A post mortem confirmed that the man died because of a resurgence of the disease rather than a reinfection. This is good news for the disease response as Ebola survivors have been employed as so-called “lullaby singers” in treatment centres.

## [Aid Organisations Asked to 'Urgently Come Back' to Ebola-Hit DRC](https://allafrica.com/view/group/main/main/id/00071329.html)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_All Africa, 12/18/19_

Doctors Without Borders is one of the last organisations providing emergency support in the southern part of DR Congo's North Kivu province. In Masisi, Rutshuru and Walikale, more than half a million displaced people now live in camps or are hosted by local families, with "worrying signs of malnutrition, sexual violence and gunshot wounds among them".

## Twitter

### [Tweet by David Gressly](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1207339501196107779)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 12/18

@DavidGressly

Important discussions today with community leaders and Aloya police on capacity building needs to deal with the epidemic #Ebola . Listening to the needs of communities affected by the virus is essential. #OnEstEnsemble

### [Tweet by the Ebola Fund](https://twitter.com/theebolafund/status/1207400981627060225)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 12/18

@theebolafund

Over half a million displaced people now live in camps or are hosted by local families in #DRC because of #Ebola and regional violence. Aid organizations must continue to help end the #outbreak and meet the growing humanitarian needs

[Tweet by Helen Branswell](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1207064923945209856)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 12/17

@HelenBranswell

The suspected case of #Ebola reinfection was probably not reinfection, @WHOAFRO is reporting. Preliminary analysis of the samples from the man's 2 positive tests suggests he suffered a relapse of his infection. That can happen; virus can remain in the body & reactivate.