---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (7/19/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for July 19th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo
date: 2019-07-19 14:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **10 new cases** as of July 18th.

DRC minister of health forbids pastors and other clergy from "laying on of hands to the faithful during prayer” in areas under threat of Ebola.

UNICEF and its partners have opened nurseries next to Ebola treatment centers in Beni and Butembo, where Ebola survivors, themselves virtually immune to the virus, are caregivers for children.

Rwandan authorities refuted reports that the fishmonger responsible for Uganda’s renewed Ebola surveillance, had crossed into the border town of Gisenyi.

## WHO AFRO Dashboard/DRC MoH Stats

[DRC MoH Statistics<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://us13.campaign-archive.com/?u=89e5755d2cca4840b1af93176&id=c0fbfca105){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases in DRC: 2,532**

* Confirmed cases: 2,438
* Probable cases: 94
* Suspected cases: 402

**Deaths in DRC: 1,705**

**Vaccinated in DRC: 165,907**

## Minister of Health to pastors: 'We must make people stop believing that the laying on of hands can cure Ebola'

[_H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/07/minister-of-health-to-pastors-we-must-make-people-stop-believing-that-the-laying-on-of-hands-can-cure-ebola.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_7/18/19_

"I would like here to sound the alarm, it would be necessary for all the religious authorities to meet and say clearly that the laying on of hands does not cure Ebola, we must stop making people believe that this practice can cure and it would be necessary that the laying on of hands is banned during this period of the epidemic," DRC’s health minister, Oly Ilunga Kalenga said. "Ebola is nothing supernatural, Ebola is a virus and Ebola is a disease that can be cured when patients are caught very early," he added. The case in the city of Goma and that of the neighboring country, Uganda, were both related to pastoral families, as well as several others in Beni and Butembo.

## Survivors Care For Children Orphaned By Ebola In The Democratic Republic Of Congo

[_Forbes_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.forbes.com/sites/unicefusa/2019/07/18/survivors-care-for-children-orphaned-by-ebola-in-the-democratic-republic-of-congo/#7c70eac536d5){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Sarah Ferguson, 7/18/19_

**Children account for nearly one-third of all confirmed and probable Ebola cases in DRC**, compared to about one-fifth in previous outbreaks. Working with national governments, WHO, and other partners to combat the severe, often fatal virus illness, UNICEF is leading mass public health information campaigns, protecting schoolchildren with handwashing facilities and caring for children orphaned by Ebola. Hundreds of children have been orphaned or left on their own when their parents contracted Ebola and were taken to treatment centers or died. Children who lose a parent due to Ebola or whose parents are infected by the disease are at risk of being stigmatized, isolated or abandoned, in addition to the heartbreak of losing a loved one. Ebola survivors are providing love and affection to these children and can cuddle them without risk of infection.

## Rwanda dismisses WHO report about possible Ebola border breach

[_Africanews_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.africanews.com/2019/07/19/uganda-intensifies-surveillance-after-who-reports-new-ebola-incident/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_7/19/19_

“There is no Ebola in Rwanda as far as we are concerned. We have a strong surveillance system in place that helps us to prevent its entry,” Malic Kayumba, Head of Communications at Rwanda Biomedical Centre told The EastAfrican. WHO has withdrawn the reports that the fishmonger who vomited at a popular market in Uganda’s border Mpondwe town, might also have done business in Rwanda before returning to DRC where she died, which was reportedly published without the knowledge of WHO headquarters in Geneva. Rwanda has never had a recorded case of Ebola. Meanwhile, WHO will work with authorities in Uganda to vaccinate about 590 fishmongers at the Mpondwe market.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 7/18/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1151952449265197061){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

On the not-good side of things, insecurity continues to be a problem that affects the outbreak response.

### Tweet by WHO African Region– 7/18/19

[@WHOAFRO<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/WHOAFRO/status/1151901864763506688){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

@WHO #Ebola response leaders engage with all members of community. @DamelSoceFall meets with taxi-moto drivers, who are the heart of life in Alloya. He listens to their thoughts & concerns about Ebola & shares what must be done to protect the community ➡️ [http://bit.ly/30Fk6Dy](http://bit.ly/30Fk6Dy "http://bit.ly/30Fk6Dy")

### Tweet by Amy Maxmen– 7/18/19

[@amymaxmen<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/amymaxmen/status/1151960155560398849){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Because I was in #DRC in June, I understand why the WHO hesitated to sound the highest #Ebola alarm (PHEIC), & I also saw how seriously the @WHO has taken this outbreak from the start. Thanks to @pulitzercenter for funding my trip. I hope people read the news I’m reporting.