---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (8/5/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for August 5th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo
date: 2019-08-05 16:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **12 new cases** as of August 4th.

Ugandan researchers have started a 2-year trial among healthcare and frontline workers to provide additional safety and efficacy information on the Johnson & Johnson (J&J) Ebola vaccine.

There is no new positive case in Goma. Dr. Jean-Jacques Muyembe mentions that the active cases of a mother and daughter from last week are getting better.

A Japanese woman who recently returned from DRC underwent testing at a Tokyo medical institution for a possible Ebola virus infection but tested negative yesterday.

Yesterday in Kinshasa, 3 civil society organizations jointly ask DRC’s president, Félix Tshisekedi, to refuse future government entry to any person cited in reports on corruption and human rights violations and those subject to international sanctions.

### Recommended reading: 

[Ebola vaccine: Why is a new jab so controversial?](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-49164066?ocid=socialflow_twitter)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://mailchi.mp/sante.gouv.cd/ebola_kivu_1aout19?e=34c0620338){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 2,753**

* Confirmed cases: 2,659
* Probable cases: 94
* Suspected cases: 397

**Deaths: 1,843**

**Vaccinated** (as of August 2): **181,389**

## Uganda starts Ebola vaccine trial among healthcare and frontline workers

[_LSHTM_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.lshtm.ac.uk/newsevents/news/2019/uganda-starts-ebola-vaccine-trial-among-healthcare-and-frontline-workers){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/2/19_

The ZEBOVAC trial will be undertaken at Epicentre Mbarara, Mbarara University of Science and Technology in Western Uganda and is sponsored by the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) and funded by Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI). The J&J vaccine has been tested in more than 6,000 people in Europe, United States and Africa - including Uganda - and is safe. Although it has not been used in previous outbreaks, and thus demonstration of efficacy in humans is lacking, its safety and immunogenicity in humans has been shown. This is the largest-ever trial of the experimental Ebola vaccine.

## Goma-Ebola: 'The two patients are getting better and have started to feed themselves'

[_Actualite.cd via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/08/goma-ebola-the-two-patients-are-getting-better-and-have-started-to-feed-themselves.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/4/19_

“I think that in the coming days, they will even be able to leave the treatment center," said Dr. Jean-Jacques Muyembe, DRC’s new Ebola response coordinator. Active case research is continuing, and suspects may be released as early as today, August 5th. Dr. Muyembe also sensitized some churches in Goma yesterday before heading to Beni today. "I sent the message to understand how the virus is transmitted and how to avoid it. We seek the collaboration and the involvement of the population. I was happy that pastors and priests got involved."

## Japanese woman returning from Congo tests negative for Ebola

[_Kyodo News_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://english.kyodonews.net/news/2019/08/1a4ad07c5734-japanese-woman-tested-for-possible-ebola-virus-infection-in-tokyo.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/4/19_

The woman in her 70s was hospitalized at the National Institute of Infectious Diseases after developing a high fever on Saturday, the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare said. The ministry added that she tested positive for influenza and did not have any contact with “Ebola-infected people” during her stay in DRC.

## RDC : la société civile appelle Félix Tshisekedi à ne pas nommer des ministres sous sanctions internationales

[_Radio Okapi_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.radiookapi.net/2019/08/05/actualite/politique/rdc-la-societe-civile-appelle-felix-tshisekedi-ne-pas-nommer-des){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/5/19_

The declaration was made on behalf of the Civic Education Network in Congo (RECIC), the Public Expenditure Observatory (ODEP) and Collective 24. The NGOs also called on Prime Minister Ilunga Ilunkamba to review the government architecture proposed by the negotiators of the Front Commun pour le Congo (FCC) and Cap pour le Changement (CACH) platforms, according to president Félix Tshisekedi’s vision. The government architecture was announced after Félix Tshisekedi and his predecessor, Joseph Kabila, [reached an agreement](https://www.africanews.com/2019/07/27/drc-president-agrees-to-split-key-cabinet-posts-with-kabila-s-coalition/) in late July to divide the main security and economic cabinet posts roughly evenly between their two camps. CACH is Tsisekedi’s political platform, and FCC is Kabila’s.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Jennifer Nuzzo– 8/2/19

[@JenniferNuzzo<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/JenniferNuzzo/status/1157378826525118466){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Really glad to see the US Congress digging into the #Ebola crisis in DRC. We need more international support and involvement. I hope this oversight activity leads to expanded US efforts in DR.

### Tweet by Crawford Kilian– 8/3/19

[@Crof<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/Crof/status/1157796892106846208){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

\#Ebola: Attack of a convoy of the response, act of malice or ignorance (Munubo)

### Tweet by Jonny Polonsky– 8/3/19

[@jonny_polonsky<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/jonny_polonsky/status/1157587693477519366){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

"If you cared about us, you would ask us our priorities. My priority is security and making sure my children don't die from malaria or diarrhea. My priority is not #Ebola. That is your priority." Ebola outbreak still rages one year after declaration