---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (8/26/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for August 26th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-08-26 15:50:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **8 new cases** as of August 25th.

As the case number **approach 3000**, Mike Ryan, WHO's executive director of emergency programs, voices the need to reflect and change the direction of the outbreak.

The **World Bank announced US$50 million** in funding to be released to WHO for the current outbreak.

Seven months after President Felix Tshisekedi’s inauguration, **DRC has announced a new coalition government**.

### Recommended reading: 

[Factbox: Main figures in Congo's new government](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-congo-politics-government-factbox/factbox-main-figures-in-congos-new-government-idUSKCN1VG16G)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 2,978**

* Confirmed cases: 2,873
* Probable cases: 105
* Suspected cases: 397

**Deaths: 1,986**

**Vaccinated**: **204,772**

## WHO: Ebola numbers underscore need for changes, funding

[_CIDRAP_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2019/08/who-ebola-numbers-underscore-need-changes-funding){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/23/19_

At a media briefing in Geneva on Friday, Mike Ryan said there are worrying extensions of the disease and responders need donor funding to bring the outbreak under control. Though the vaccine is highly effective and two experimental Ebola treatments were found to be very promising, their impact is limited if patients aren't treated and if vaccinators can't reach contacts, either due to community resistance or insecurity, he said. Ryan said the price tag for the public health part of the response is $278 million, and the WHO has asked for $120 million. So far, the WHO has received $15.33 million, and officials believe $62 million are in the pipeline, based on donor pledges, resulting in a $60 million gap.

Shortly after Ryan’s briefing the World Bank announced $50 million to close the funding gap through the end of September. The amount includes **$30 million from the Pandemic Emergency Financing Facility** and **$20 million from the World Bank**. In a [statement](https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2019/08/23/world-bank-and-who-statement-on-partnership-deployment-of-financing-to-who-for-ebola-response-in-drc), WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus lauded the World Bank and added that the WHO eagerly anticipates further funding from other donors. The World Bank said the grants are part of a larger financial package worth about $300 million that it announced in July.

## DRC announces new government 7 months after president inaugurated

[_Al Jazeera_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2019/08/dr-congo-announces-gov-7-months-president-inaugurated-190826061019033.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/26/19_

The power-sharing agreement saw 23 members of the executive drawn from Tshisekedi's Direction For Change party, and the remaining 42 from former long-time president Joseph Kabila's Common Front for Congo (FCC) coalition. Prime Minister Sylvestre Ilunga Ilukamba said the delay in forming the government was a result of both sides needing time to "remove everything that could be an obstacle" to its "functioning". About three-quarters of those in the new administration were serving in government for the first time, he added, hailing this as an "important innovation". Tshisekedi took office in January after winning a December 30 election which observers said was marred by irregularities and opponents denounced as rigged.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Mark Green– 8/26/19

[@USAIDMarkGreen<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/USAIDMarkGreen/status/1165988579497189376){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Last week I was in the #DRCongo where I urged government officials for immediate action to address the underlying issues impeding efforts to end the #Ebola outbreak. Read my op-ed here about how we are responding:

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 8/24/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1165329956425150464){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

8\. Finally, I'm posting this map, mainly because it's clear and so few are. It also gives a decent sense of 1) how stretched out this outbreak is & 2) where most of the cases are. Grey & white=none. Other than that, the darker the tone, the more cases.

### Tweet by Gavi– 8/23/19

[@gavi<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/gavi/status/1164877949943742464){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

“The Ebola vaccine is very helpful for #GlobalHealthSecurity because if you build up immunity to Ebola then you won’t see big outbreaks that take the lives of citizens and healthcare workers.” -Wilhelmina Jallah, Minister of Health for #Liberia #VaccinesWork