---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (10/29/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for October 29th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-10-29 14:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **4 new cases** reported on October 28th.

The principle hot spots of the outbreak in the past 21 days are Mandima and Mabalako.

The International Rescue Committee (IRC) reaffirms its commitment to ending Ebola in the DRC.

### Recommended reading: 

[Q&A: Should Ebola care be integrated into DRC's public health system?<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.devex.com/news/q-a-should-ebola-care-be-integrated-into-drc-s-public-health-system-95870?utm_source=Global+Health+NOW+Main+List&utm_campaign=4ed386d793-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2019_10_28_05_14&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_8d0d062dbd-4ed386d793-2888645){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of October 28)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,268**

* Confirmed cases: 3,151
* Probable cases: 117
* Suspected cases: 400

**Deaths: 2,181**

**Vaccinated**: **243,959**

## Any let up in Ebola response could risk escalation of outbreak in DRC, warns IRC

[_IRC_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.rescue-uk.org/press-release/any-let-ebola-response-could-risk-escalation-outbreak-drc-warns-irc?edme=true){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/29/19_

Dalia al-Awqati, Ebola Response Director in the DRC at the IRC said: “Whilst we have seen the number of reported cases drop in the past weeks, cases continue to arise, and the challenges we face in controlling the spread are undiminished. We are walking on a tightrope…It only takes one infected person to travel to a new area to start a new transmission chain. Given the 21-day incubation period, the chances of this are relatively high.”

The IRC has been responding to the outbreak in North Kivu and Ituri since its declaration last year and is also working in women’s and children’s protection and community engagement. The IRC has a long-standing presence in this area of North Kivu and continues to equally address pre-existing and persistent health and protection needs related to displacement and insecurity in this area.

## Twitter

### Tweet by David Gressly– 10/29/19

[@DavidGressly<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1189165750986166272){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Introducing UNEERO’s new deputy in the hotspot of Biakato where all our teams work hard on fighting #Ebola together with the @MinSanteRDC and amazing teams of Congolese doctors. @UNICEFDRC @OMSRDCONGO #OnEstEnsemble

### Tweet by WHO African Region– 10/29/19

[@WHOAFRO<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/WHOAFRO/status/1189172888592617473){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

\#HappeningNow #DRC gov, @MinSanteRDC & partners meet in #Goma to review #Ebola response plan. All partners are taking stock of response progress & charting "final push" to end the outbreak.

### Tweet by Outi Kuivasniemi– 10/29/19

[@OutiKuivasniemi<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/OutiKuivasniemi/status/1188811891541458944){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Highlights from #WHS2019 @JaneRuth_Aceng ’#Ebola sneaks in like an enemy and spreads like wildfire. We need community surveillance, realtime info, good infrastructure, infection control, strong healthsystems, educated workforce, multisectoral collaboration, oper & pol leadership’