---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (10/28/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for October 28th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-10-28 18:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **1 new case** reported on October 27th.

The virus has returned to Butembo, just 10 days after the former hot spot was cleared of the disease.

### Recommended reading: 

[Blandine Kazade: The nurse who saved a city in the Democratic Republic of the Congo<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.afro.who.int/news/blandine-kazade-nurse-who-saved-city-democratic-republic-congo){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of October 27)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,264**

* Confirmed cases: 3,147
* Probable cases: 117
* Suspected cases: 357

**Deaths: 2,181**

**Vaccinated**: **243,322**

## More Ebola cases in DRC, including Butembo

[_CIDRAP_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2019/10/more-ebola-cases-drc-including-butembo){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/25/19_

Towards the end of last week, one conformed case was reported in Butembo, North Kivu. Earlier this month, DRC officials tweeted that the last remaining patients at an Ebola treatment center in Butembo had been discharged, a sign the virus was on the retreat from that area of North Kivu province. Butembo has been a hot spot of Ebola virus activity throughout the 14-month-long outbreak in the DRC.

## Twitter

### Tweet by David Gressly– 10/28/19

[@DavidGressly<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1188717134668554240){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Listen to part 1 of a series of 4 stories on Ebola-hit towns in the DRC starting with Bingo. Yesterday a case was reported there although the area had been free of #Ebola for over 40 days. We need to remain vigilant at all times. The battle isn't over yet.

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 10/26/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1188154950360227841){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

2\. Oct. is on track to record the fewest #Ebola cases since Sept '18, when the North Kivu-Ituri outbreak really kicked into gear. There's been an average of 2.6 cases/day in October, half of the daily increase in Sept '19. At the height of the outbreak, there were 14.8/day in May