---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (10/1/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for October 1st, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-10-01 14:15:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **3 new cases** as of September 30th.

The Sabin Vaccine Institute announced a funding award of $20.5 million with options for an additional $107.5 million from the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA).

Armed men identified as Mai-Mai militia attacked an Ebola health response team in Mambasa territory, on Sunday night.

### Recommended reading: 

[Opinion: The Ebola epidemic is in full swing. Where is the Trump administration?<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2019/10/01/ebola-epidemic-is-full-swing-where-is-trump-administration/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of September 30)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,191**

* Confirmed cases: 3,077
* Probable cases: 114
* Suspected cases: 425

**Deaths: 2,133**

**Vaccinated**: **230,489**

## Sabin Vaccine Institute Receives $20.5 Million From BARDA With Potential of up to $128 Million to Develop Ebola Sudan and Marburg Vaccines

[_Markets Insider_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://markets.businessinsider.com/news/stocks/sabin-vaccine-institute-receives-20-5-million-from-barda-with-potential-of-up-to-128-million-to-develop-ebola-sudan-and-marburg-vaccines-1028567085){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/1/19_

Under the terms of this agreement, the full [program](https://www.sabin.org/programs/research-development/ebola-marburg) is expected to advance development of clinical-stage monovalent vaccines against Ebola Sudan and Marburg viruses through Phase 2 clinical trials. The BARDA funding will enable Sabin to advance the investigational Ebola Sudan and Marburg vaccines using the ChAd3-based platform recently licensed under an agreement between GSK and Sabin. Under the terms of the agreement, the initial $20.5 million award supports process development and non-clinical activities. Additional non-clinical studies, as well as manufacturing of clinical material and Phase 2 clinical trials in the United States and Africa, may be supported by $107.5 million in additional funding.

## Mambasa: Armed men attack Ebola response team in Biakato

[_Radio Okapi_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.radiookapi.net/2019/10/01/actualite/sante/mambasa-des-hommes-armes-attaquent-une-equipe-de-riposte-contre-ebola?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+radiookapi%2Factu+%28Radiookapi.net+-+Actualit%C3%A9%29){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/1/19_

About 30 men armed with knives and rifles have invested the locality of Biakato in Djugu territory, reports the human rights NGO Convention for the Development of Forest Peoples (CODEPEF). The deputy coordinator of this NGO said that these armed men "seek to avenge the death of the nurse who died of Ebola at the Mangina treatment center". For these militiamen, this health worker who is their brother was killed voluntarily by the response team. Thanks to the rapid intervention of the police, there were no casualties. According to local sources, some residents of surrounding villages are supporting this armed group to oppose the fight against Ebola.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 10/1/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1179020461952442368){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

1\. Here's one reason why I'm taking the rapidly declining #Ebola case numbers in DRC with a boulder of salt: Lwemba. There's been insecurity there for the past 2 weeks & the response teams haven't been able to work there. That presumably means no vaccination.

### Tweet by David Gressly– 9/29/19

[@DavidGressly<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1178270236979671041){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

A visual story of the #Ebola response in the #DRC with amazing pictures of our photographer @martineperret who travelled the region to show the people behind the response