---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (9/17/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for September 17th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-09-17 15:45:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
On a positive note, there was just **1 new case** recorded on September 16th.

Health experts remain cautious of concluding that the drop in cases is a sign that the outbreak is coming under control.

US health officials called on Tanzania to ensure transparency and share lab results after a patient died after experiencing Ebola-like symptoms.

Student researchers at the MIT Center for Transportation and Logistics produced new research aimed at improving diagnostics and operations during Ebola outbreaks.

### Recommended reading: 

[As Congo’s Ebola Outbreak Drags On, Untracked Cases Sow Confusion<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/16/health/ebola-congo-azar-fauci.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of September 16)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,130**

* Confirmed cases: 3,019
* Probable cases: 111
* Suspected cases: 402

**Deaths: 2,096**

**Vaccinated**: **222,128**

## US urges transparency in Ebola-like death in Tanzania

[_Washington Post_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/us-official-urges-transparency-in-tanzania-mystery-death/2019/09/16/50e73be2-d890-11e9-a1a5-162b8a9c9ca2_story.html?noredirect=on){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/16/19_

Alex Azar, speaking in Uganda, told reporters that he and others are “very concerned” and urged Tanzania’s government to share laboratory results regarding the case. WHO, in a statement last week, noted a rumor regarding a death in Tanzania from an unknown illness and sent a technical team to investigate “as a matter of urgency.” The patient, a 34-year-old woman, died on Sept. 8 and was buried the same day. It was not clear where she died. The victim most recently was a student in central Uganda, before returning to Tanzania on Aug. 22; no case of Ebola has been reported in Uganda’s central region. Tanzania’s government said there is no confirmed case of Ebola in the country; no confirmed Ebola case has ever been recorded there.

## Uninfected patients key to improving Ebola response

[_MIT News_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://news.mit.edu/2019/uninfected-patients-key-improving-ebola-response-0916){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/16/19_

Current forecasting of Ebola resources is based on unreliable numbers from previous outbreaks and focus on predicting the infected population. But the researchers found that up to 88% of service capacity was consumed by Ebola-negative patients, suggesting an urgent need for speedier diagnostics that can free up beds and resources. This exploratory research stresses the need for improved forecasting of the Ebola-negative population, particularly for outbreaks in densely populated regions.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 9/17/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1173973518930853888){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

When will there be a licensed #Ebola vaccine? Perhaps by the end of Q1 2020. #Merck announced @US_FDA has accepted its full dossier (ie the rolling application is complete) & has granted V920 a priority review. FDA is to rule by March 14, 2020. This is the vaccine in use in DRC.

### Tweet by Amy Maxmen– 9/17/19

[@amymaxmen<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/amymaxmen/status/1173965962384527360){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

This quote by @DrTedros is spot-on & similar to the closing quote in a story I wrote during the 2015 #Ebola crisis. "Ebola is only the symptom, the disease is weak institutions," @OBSisay said. "If we have a flood or a tsunami, it will reveal all the same things."

### Tweet by UNICEF– 9/17/19

[@UNICEF<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/UNICEF/status/1173906943829663744){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

It's no exaggeration to say Jean-Pierre is saving lives with his megaphone. In DR Congo, fearless colleagues like him are helping prevent the spread of Ebola.