---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (12/5/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for December 5th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-12-05 16:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **5** **new cases** reported on December 5th.

GAVI announced Thursday it would invest $178 million to create a global stockpile of 500,000 doses of the Ebola vaccine.

The development of a new Ebola vaccine is underway in Japan. Researchers believe it may have fewer side effects compared to current options.

MSF has announced that it is pulling out its non-local medical personnel from an eastern region of DRC.

### Recommended reading:

[Ebola was almost contained in Congo. A wave of violence threatens to bring it roaring back.<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/ebola-was-almost-contained-in-congo-a-wave-of-violence-threatens-to-bring-it-roaring-back/2019/12/04/61a35cc8-1543-11ea-80d6-d0ca7007273f_story.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of December 5)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,318**

* Confirmed cases: 3,200
* Probable cases: 118
* Suspected cases: 319

**Deaths: 2,206**

**Vaccinated**:

* **255,650** (Merck Vaccine)
* **872** (J&J Vaccine)

## Half a million Ebola vaccine doses to be stockpiled for emergency use

[_Reuters_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-ebola-vaccine/half-a-million-ebola-vaccine-doses-to-be-stockpiled-for-emergency-use-idUSKBN1Y91IL){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_12/5/19_

A stockpile of 500,000 doses of Ebola vaccine for emergency use in outbreaks of the virus is being established by the global vaccine alliance GAVI. The stockpiling will begin with Merck’s newly developed Ervebo vaccine, which won regulatory approval last month. The price paid for the Ebola vaccines will be agreed in a tender process led by the U.N. children’s fund UNICEF, GAVI’s procurement agency. Jason Nickerson, a humanitarian affairs expert for Medecins Sans Frontieres, welcomed GAVI’s move, but urged it to allow a “thorough, independent and transparent estimate” of the vaccines’ cost of manufacture to “ensure that the price paid is fair and reasonable”. GAVI plans to give poor and middle-income countries access to the $178 stockpile free of charge, while other countries will need to refund the costs.

## Tokyo University team to start first clinical trials of new Ebola vaccine

[_Japan Times_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2019/12/05/national/science-health/tokyo-university-trials-ebola-vaccine/#.Xekg4-hKiM8){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_12/5/19_

A team of University of Tokyo researchers said Thursday it will begin the nation’s first clinical study on a new vaccine for the Ebola virus. The vaccine has proven safe and effective in tests involving monkeys and is believed to have fewer side effects compared to current vaccines. Thirty healthy adult men are set to receive intramuscular injections of the vaccine and will be checked for fever as well as the development of antibodies. Both Merck and Johnson & Johnson, two American pharmaceuticals, have vaccinations currently underway in Africa.

## Doctors treating Ebola flee DR Congo's east amid deadly violence

[_Al Jazeera_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2019/12/doctors-treating-ebola-flee-dr-congo-east-deadly-violence-191205013829630.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_12/4/19_

The non-profit group Doctors Without Borders (MSF) has pulled its foreign staff out of an eastern region of Democratic Republic of Congo after an armed group tried to enter its compound. The group is the latest aid agency to withdraw its staff from the Biakato region, after three health workers treating Ebola were killed in an attack last week in Ituri province. MSF said that on Tuesday night a group wielding machetes and sticks broke into the Biakato Health Centre, where it operates an Ebola Treatment Centre. A separate group with the same weapons then tried but failed to enter the MSF facility in Biakato Mines. As of November 4, authorities said more than 300 attacks on Ebola health workers had been recorded since the start of the year, leaving six dead and 70 wounded, some of them patients.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Helen Branswell – 12/4/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1202356650650349570){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

4\. This is such a critical time in the North Kivu-Ituri #Ebola outbreak. Transmission had gone to quite low levels. Only 26 cases in the past 21 days, according to this week's report from @WHOAFRO. But when the response efforts have to stand down, Ebola gets a free pass.

### Tweet by Amesh Adalja – 12/5/19

[@AmeshAA<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/AmeshAA/status/1202591574812741632){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

"Cas suspect or 'suspected case' is just one example of a problematic term used in French across the #Ebola response..local residents might interpret it literally as someone with the symptoms of Ebola who is a bad person ('suspect') with little worth"

[https://t.co/catyTCKdvw?amp=1<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://t.co/catyTCKdvw?amp=1){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}