---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (12/2/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for December 2nd, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-12-02 15:45:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **3 new cases** reported on December 2nd.

On November 27, rebels killed four Ebola response workers and injured several others at two Ebola centers, warning that the waning outbreak may gain new momentum in what has been called a war zone.

The Director General of the World Health Organization (WHO), Dr. Tedros Ghebreysus arrived Goma yesterday, to express his solidarity with the DRC government and discuss strategies to end the epidemic.

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of December 2)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,313**

* Confirmed cases: 3,195
* Probable cases: 118
* Suspected cases: 348

**Deaths: 2,203**

**Vaccinated**:

* **255,441** (Merck Vaccine)
* __821*__ (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

_*Two days have passed without vaccination activity with the J&J vaccine following the disorders initiated by young people related to the security situation in Beni_

## Rebel attacks in eastern Congo kill several Ebola responders

[_AP_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://apnews.com/444a95f488fd4103a7a72cb2db96645d?utm_source=Twitter&utm_campaign=SocialFlow&utm_medium=AP_Africa){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Al-Hadji Kudra Maliro and Cara Anna, 11/28/19_

The dead included a member of a vaccination team, two drivers and a police officer. Many of the six others wounded were with Congo’s health ministry. Mai-Mai fighters attacked a camp housing scores of aid workers overnight in Biakato, local official Salambongo Selemani told The Associated Press. Warnings had been posted demanding that the health workers leave or face “the worst,” Selemani said. The other attack targeted an Ebola response coordination office in Mangina, WHO said. Allied Democratic Forces rebels are to blame, Beni territory administrator Donat Kasereka Kibwana said.

WHO’s emergencies director Dr. Mike Ryan, however, said neither the attackers’ identities nor their motivation had been confirmed but it was “unmistakably a directed attack at the response.” More than 100 WHO staffers and other aid workers were evacuated. Overall, health workers and infrastructure have been attacked 386 times with seven people killed and 77 wounded, Ryan said. Ebola response work was put on lockdown in Beni, dismaying health experts who say every attack hurts crucial efforts to contain the deadly virus. Most of the recent new cases have been reported in the newly targeted communities of Biakato, Mangina and Beni.

## Violence in DR Congo Ebola hotspot leaves people ‘caught in crossfire’

[_UN News_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://news.un.org/en/story/2019/11/1052441){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_11/29/19_

Tensions in eastern Beni territory in DRC’s North Kivu province have been rising since the launch of a Government-led security operation against the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) on 30 October. In a statement, Hervé Verhoosel, spokesperson for the UN World Food Programme (WFP) said that the agency had suspended aid distribution “because the security was not guaranteed anymore, and the access was very difficult”. Forced recruitment by armed groups is a real threat to the safety of children and women also face widespread sexual violence, abuse and risk of exploitation. Highlighting the impact of the insecurity in Beni and Oicha on frontline health workers tasked with tracing anyone who has come into contact with people infected with Ebola, Christian Lindmeier, spokesperson for WHO, said that surveillance levels had dropped from 86 to 59 percent at the start of the week. According to WHO, around one-third of WHO’s Ebola response personnel in Beni have been temporarily relocated to Goma.

## WHO Director-General praises bravery of health workers during visit to eastern Democratic Republic of Congo following fatal attacks on Ebola responders

[_WHO_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/01-12-2019-who-director-general-praises-bravery-of-health-workers-during-visit-to-eastern-democratic-republic-of-congo-following-fatal-attacks-on-ebola-responders){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_12/1/19_

“I came here today to stand side by side with you, my sisters and brothers, and commend you all for your compassion and bravery in this most trying of times,” said Dr Tedros during a visit to Goma. “You have put your lives on the line to protect the health and wellbeing of others. I have also come here to recommit my steadfast support, and that of the World Health Organization, to the affected communities of this region and to the government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to bring the Ebola outbreak under control.” Despite the disruptions caused by the two separate attacks in Biakato Mines and Mangina, WHO and humanitarian partners in eastern DRC have committed to continue their Ebola response operations. In Goma, Dr Tedros met and thanked Ebola responders who are in hospital recovering from injuries suffered in the 27 November attacks. Dr Tedros also met with National Ebola Coordinator Steve Ahuka and expressed solidarity with and support for the Government and people of the DRC, noting, "We won't give up and we will finish the job." Later, Dr Tedros and Professor Ahuka met with DRC Ministry of Health, WHO and other responders, including those evacuated following the violence, paying tribute to their selflessness and persistence.

## Twitter

### Tweet by US Mission to the AU– 12/2/19

[@US_AU<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/US_AU/status/1201522841642033152){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

"We are fighting the #Ebola outbreak w/our resources & expertise & working urgently w/regional govs, NGOs, @_AfricanUnion & @UN. The U.S. encourages int'l partners to continue providing robust financial & tech. support to the response." -Amb. Lapenn at #AfricaAgainstEbola Forum

### Tweet by Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus– 12/1/19

[@DrTedros<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DrTedros/status/1201256558799261699){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Your Holiness @Pontifex, thank you for sharing your thoughts and prayers for the people of #DRC. Their safety and security is an essential precondition to overcome other challenges they face to live healthier lives.

### Tweet by Max Bearak– 11/30/19

[@maxbearak<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/maxbearak/status/1200718773570936832){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

At the funeral of Belinda Kasongo, 30, vaccinator, statistician, one of Congo’s brightest, who gave her life to stop Ebola’s spread. Her murder comes at a time of heightened hostility toward foreign health & peacekeeping interventions here. The victims are almost all Congolese.

### Tweet by Kivu Security– 11/28/19

[@KivuSecurity<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/KivuSecurity/status/1200125470999748608){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

The death toll for the #Maleki massacre increased to 27 after new bodies were discovered in the nearby village of #Masuku. This is the deadliest attack in the series of massacres that began on November 5 in #Beni territory. A total of 107 civilians have been killed #DRC