---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (6/27/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for June 27th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo
date: 2019-06-27 20:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **12 new cases** in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) as of June 26th, 2019.

WHO appeals to Ugandans to trust the trial vaccine after **13 people who came in contact with the virus declined to be vaccinated**.

USAID confirms that four major donors to the Ebola outbreak response in DRC have “**jump-started a new strategic plan**" that aims to revamp leadership and coordination, community engagement, and financial management.

### Recommended reading:

[Ebola response in Congo leaves locals at greatest risk<i/>{:class="icon-external-link"}](https://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/news-feature/2019/06/27/ebola-response-congo-leaves-locals-greatest-risk){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

## WHO AFRO Dashboard/DRC MoH Stats

[DRC MoH Statistics<i/>{:class="icon-external-link"}](http://translate.google.com/translate?hl=auto&langpair=auto%7Cen&u=https%3A%2F%2Fus13.campaign-archive.com%2F%3Fu%3D89e5755d2cca4840b1af93176%26id%3Dd88649a909%26e%3D34c0620338){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

**Total cases in DRC: 2,277**

* Confirmed cases: 2,183
* Probable cases: 94
* Suspected cases: 329

**Deaths in DRC: 1,531**

**Vaccinated in DRC: 142,871**

## WHO Appeals to Ugandans With Ebola Contact to Trust Vaccine

[Voice of America<i/>{:class="icon-external-link"}](https://www.voanews.com/science-health/who-appeals-ugandans-ebola-contact-trust-vaccine){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

_By Halima Athumani, 6/27/19_

Village health coordinator Mbusa Geoffrey tells VOA the 13 believe that only prayer can protect them from the virus. Ugandan Health Minister Ruth Aceng says those who do not want to be vaccinated have not been adequately sensitized. "My appeal to the 13 who have declined vaccination is for them to come out and get vaccinated," she stressed. "We want them alive. And we also want to ensure that other people are alive. It is for their own good." Uganda remains at risk due to the heavy influx of refugees fleeing conflicts in the eastern part of DRC.

## US looks to 'reset leadership and coordination' as Ebola outbreak worsens

[Devex<i/>{:class="icon-external-link"}](https://www.devex.com/news/us-looks-to-reset-leadership-and-coordination-as-ebola-outbreak-worsens-95201){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

_By Michael Igoe, 6/27/19_

“There are some significant shifts underway right now," Tim Ziemer, senior deputy assistant administrator at the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), said Wednesday. “We have been teaming up with our international partners: the World Bank, the U.K. government, and the E.U. They’re the principal other investors in addition to the United States, and there was an acknowledgment that we need a total reset in three major areas," he said. With the new leadership structure, the U.S. government hopes to see a new strategic plan produced by the end of July. Among the issues that plan will attempt to tackle is the current lack of financial transparency. The current “burn rate" for Ebola response funding is roughly $1 million a day, Ziemer said, and projecting that out for another 10 or 12 months suggests a response somewhere in the range of $350 to $400 million, he estimated. One issue standing in the way of more U.S. government funding for DRC is the Trump administration’s strict implementation of trafficking in persons sanctions against the country’s government. Despite the Ebola outbreak, President Donald Trump has elected not to issue a waiver for DRC that will allow government-to -government assistance.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 6/27/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class="icon-external-link"}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1144330841247629313){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

It's been nearly two months since a group of experts returned from a mission to DRC's #Ebola zone at the behest of @WHO to assess the outbreak response. I believe their report has been in for weeks. I'm starting to wonder if it will ever see the light of day. 🤔

### Tweet by L'OMS en RDC– 6/27/19

[@OMSRDCONGO<i/>{:class="icon-external-link"}](https://twitter.com/OMSRDCONGO/status/1144268841301827585){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

This is how joint team IPC (infection & prevention control) @MinSanteRDC & @WHO work on the ground, going to a remote area like here in Kasebere to evacuate a patient from his village to the #Ebola treatment unit to take care of him. Kasebere is a high risk area with armed groups

### Tweet by Laurie Garrett– 6/27/19

[@Laurie_Garrett<i/>{:class="icon-external-link"}](https://twitter.com/Laurie_Garrett/status/1144281333692272641){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

Note the angles, behind vehicles: evacuating an #Ebola victim in a war zone means wearing hot, cumbersome gear to protect you from the virus, and using your vehicle & its doors to shield you from bullets.
