---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (12/11/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for December 11th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-12-11 16:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **10** **new cases** reported on December 11th.

According to WHO’s latest External Situation Report, the volume of reports and contacts traced are slowly improving after a reduction due to insecurity in recent weeks.

### Recommended reading: 

[Information is power – and, in the DRC’s fight against Ebola, a matter of life and death<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/article-information-is-power-and-in-the-drcs-fight-against-ebola-a-matter/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of December 11)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,340**

* Confirmed cases: 3,222
* Probable cases: 118
* Suspected cases: 436

**Deaths: 2,209**

**Vaccinated**:

* **256,523** (Merck Vaccine)
* **1,440** (J&J Vaccine)

## Ebola Virus Disease: External Situation Report 71

[_WHO_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/330093/SITREP_EVD_DRC_20191210-eng.pdf){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_12/10/19_

In the past 21 days (18 November to 8 December 2019), 28 confirmed cases were reported from 14 of the 71 health areas within four neighboring active health zones in North Kivu and Ituri provinces. The majority of the cases are linked to known chains of transmission. More than half of the cases over the last 21 days have epidemiological links to a funeral in Lwemba Health Area.

Under Pillar 1, the public health pillar of the Strategic Response Plan, the estimated funding requirement for all partners for the period July to December 2019 is US$ 287 million, including US$ 140 million for WHO. As of 10 December 2019, US$ 148 million has been received by WHO. Meeting the funding needs of 2020 will be essential.

The Ebola response has been severely disrupted by recent attacks but WHO continues to support activities throughout the affected areas. It is adapting its strategy to protect communities from a resurgence of the outbreak while keeping responders safe.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Helen Branswell – 12/10/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1204514478504710147){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

1\. So it looks like the #Ebola response in DRC may mass vaccinate in Biakato Mines, an area near where cases are occurring but where access is limited & dangerous. Mostly the technique used is ring vaccination, but sometime geographic vaccination is used when access is limited.