---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (9/26/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for September 26th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-09-26 15:45:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **3 new cases** as of September 25th.

Yesterday at the 74th United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar co-hosted the “Meeting of Regional Ministers of Health on Ebola Preparedness and Response” with the DRC and the WHO to discuss the coordinated response to the Ebola outbreak and preparedness in the region.

Some residents in the health zone of Kayna, North Kivu, have refused to take insecticide-treated mosquito nets distributed by the Ministry of Health to fight against malaria for fear that the nets contain the Ebola virus.

### Recommended reading:

[Ebola survivors can pass on the virus: we’re trying to understand what role sex plays<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://theconversation.com/ebola-survivors-can-pass-on-the-virus-were-trying-to-understand-what-role-sex-plays-124015){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of September 25)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,178**

* Confirmed cases: 3,066
* Probable cases: 112
* Suspected cases: 520

**Deaths: 2,122**

**Vaccinated**: **227,961**

## Secretary Azar Attends Meeting of Regional Ministers of Health on Ebola Preparedness and Response at UNGA

[_EIN Newsdesk_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.einnews.com/pr_news/497457080/secretary-azar-attends-meeting-of-regional-ministers-of-health-on-ebola-preparedness-and-response-at-unga){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/25/19_

In attendance were the DRC President Felix Tshisekedi, the DRC Minister of Health Eteni Longondo, the DRC Technical Secretary of the Multi-Sectoral Committee for the Response to Ebola Jean-Jacques Muyembe, and the WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, along with Ministers of Health from Uganda, Republic of the Congo, and Rwanda, with senior officials from South Sudan, the UN, the World Bank, the United Kingdom, and European Commission. Ministers agreed to a joint [communique](https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/oga/global-health-diplomacy/protecting-life-global-health-policy/joint-communique-ebola-response/index.html). Following the meeting, Secretary Azar, Minister Longondo, Dr. Muyembe, and Dr. Tedros delivered public [remarks](https://www.hhs.gov/about/leadership/secretary/speeches/2019-speeches/remarks-on-ebola-ministers-meeting.html) emphasizing the importance of a coordinated, international response to bring this outbreak to an end and prevent future outbreaks.

## Signs DR Congo Ebola outbreak finally ‘on the retreat’ but risk of international spread, ‘still high'

[_UN News_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://news.un.org/en/story/2019/09/1047552){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/25/19_

“It’s not over, until it’s over” said Tedros Adhanom Gheybreyesus, speaking to reporters at UN Headquarters in New York, after the Meeting of Regional Ministers of Health on Ebola Preparedness and Response. He said the meeting had agreed to invest in neighboring nations not only to end the current outbreak, but also help prevent epidemics in the future. Responding to criticism reportedly levelled at the WHO vaccination strategy by partner NGO in the DRC, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), Tedros told reporters that “we learn almost every day and adjust our response accordingly”. Secretary Alex Azar was first to speak to reporters at the stakeout and said that stopping the outbreak was one of President Donald Trump’s top priorities, and thanked President Félix Tshisekedi for attending the meeting, saying the “unique” circumstances of the outbreak meant it could not be stopped “without close and committed cooperation among all stakeholders”.

## Kirumba residents refuse insecticide-treated mosquito nets, believing they contain Ebola

[_Koma Ebola via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/09/kirumba-residents-refuse-insecticide-treated-mosquitoes-believing-they-contain-ebola.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/25/19_

Dr. Kambale Tsongo, Chief Medical Officer of Kayna Health Zone was keen to reassure residents who were concerned that distributed mosquito nets contained Ebola and were an attempt to “exterminate” them. The nets were donated to the community by the DRC ministry of health in a malaria control attempt. Despite this refusal, the distribution campaign continues.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus @ #UNGA– 9/25/19

[@DrTedros<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DrTedros/status/1176936469614813186){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Huge thanks to my brother @SecAzar & the government of the US for their outstanding support to @WHO & partners to end #Ebola in #DRC, but also to strengthen the health system & be ready for other health threats in DRC. Together, for a safer world.

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 9/25/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1176959540291604481){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

3\. I don't know what to make of the decline in #Ebola cases; I don't know whether to believe the virus is being beaten back, finally. But the numbers are impressive. So far in September there've been 5.8 new cases per day on average. That's a lower daily average than March (6.5).