---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (9/10/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for September 10th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-09-10 15:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **2 new cases** as of September 9th.

To date, 5% of people infected in the DRC's outbreak have been health workers.

United States Health and Human Services (HHS) secretary, **Alex Azar, plans to travel to DRC along with a few others** from the current administration, to signal U.S. support for the response effort.

In preparation for September resumptions, schools in the DRC are taking measures to strengthen hygiene to protect students from Ebola.

Insecurity Insight announces the launch of a **new project focused on attacks on Ebola Response**.

### Recommended reading:

[Ebola preparations falter in war‑weary South Sudan<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/feature/2019/09/09/South-Sudan-Ebola-preparations){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of September 9)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,081**

* Confirmed cases: 2,970
* Probable cases: 111
* Suspected cases: 398

**Deaths: 2,070**

**Vaccinated**: **216,566**

## With Ebola cases rising, officials launch new infection control steps

[_CIDRAP_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2019/09/ebola-cases-rising-officials-launch-new-infection-control-steps){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/9/19_

One of the confirmed cases reported over the weekend involved a health worker in Butembo. The number of medical team members infected by the virus is now 157, which includes 41 deaths. Non- health worker cases were also reported in Beni, Kyondo, Katwa, and Mandima.

## Azar, other top Trump officials to travel to DRC to assess Ebola crisis

[_STAT_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.statnews.com/2019/09/10/azar-other-top-trump-officials-to-travel-to-drc-to-assess-ebola-crisis/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Helen Branswell, 9/10/19_

This marks Azar’s first trip to the region since the start of the outbreak. He will be accompanied by Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Dr. Robert Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Tim Ziemer, senior deputy assistant administrator of the U.S. Agency for International Development and staff of the National Security Council. The delegation will travel to DRC, Uganda, and Rwanda where they will meet with officials of the countries and with Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director-general of the World Health Organization. Among the topics up for discussion will be U.S. support for the outbreak, including the deployment of government employees.

## DR Congo: Schools Strengthen Hygiene To Protect Students From Ebola

[_Africa News Network_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://annafrica.news/2019/09/dr-congo-schools-strengthen-hygiene-to-protect-students-from-ebola/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/10/19_

Over 6,500 primary and secondary schools are in Ebola-affected areas of Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu provinces. UNICEF figures show approximately two million children are returning to school in these regions this year. Officials are unanimous about the need to reinforce the sanitary devices to ensure the safety of pupils. In Goma, authorities required children to strictly follow hygiene rules; wash basins are installed at the entrance of enclosure areas and at the door of each classroom.

## Insecurity Insight announces the launch of a new project: Attacks on Ebola Response for organisations and health providers working on health care in the DRC

[_ReliefWeb_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://reliefweb.int/report/democratic-republic-congo/insecurity-insight-announces-launch-new-project-attacks-ebola){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/10/19_

At least 200 attacks and threats against health workers have been reported this year alone. This project aims to support organisations and health providers to mitigate the impact of attacks on health care, ensure staff safety, and better health outcomes. The information is provided through: Information Alerts, Practical Recommendations, and Trend Analysis and Risk Management. This project is funded by the H2H Fund which is supported by UK aid. It will run from September to November 2019.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 9/9/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1171223926535544832){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

5\. Lest we get too reassured by the declining #Ebola case numbers in DRC, there's this: According to @UNICEF, still more than 1 in 4 Ebola cases is someone who is only spotted as Ebola-infected after they die in the community. This is how Ebola spreads.

### Tweet by Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus– 9/9/19

[@DrTedros<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DrTedros/status/1171120045377970181){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Congratulations to Eteni Longondo on his nomination as the Minister of Health DRC. @WHO will continue working closely with @MinSanteRDC to stop the #Ebola outbreak and strengthen the health system.

### Tweet by Africa CDC– 9/10/19

[@AfricaCDC<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/AfricaCDC/status/1171381175723708416){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Orientation today in Kinshasa #DRCongo by @MinSanteRDC @_AfricanUnion and @AfricaCDC for 17 newly selected volunteers to join #Ebola virus disease outbreak response. Total of 30 new volunteers selected to join the response force. We are determined to put an end to Ebola in DRC.