---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (8/2/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for August 2nd, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo
date: 2019-08-02 16:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **10 new cases** as of August 1st.

A fourth case of Ebola has been confirmed in Goma.

Rwanda advises its citizens not to go "needlessly" to Goma, and for those who have stayed there to be tested.

Community leadership and mobilization is integral to stopping the outbreak. Amy Daffe, Deputy country director for Mercy Corps in DRC, notes that insufficient emphasis is being placed on building community trust and acceptance.

David Gressly explains that improved core response techniques, such as proper surveillance and monitoring systems, are still needed.

### _Recommended readings:_

* [Ebola outbreak in five graphics](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-48621085)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}
* [Ebola outbreak highlights global rise in epidemics](https://thehill.com/policy/international/455764-ebola-outbreak-highlights-global-rise-in-epidemics)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Stats/WHO AFRO Dashboard 

[DRC MoH Statistics<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://mailchi.mp/sante.gouv.cd/ebola_kivu_1aout19?e=34c0620338){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 2,713**

* Confirmed cases: 2,619
* Probable cases: 94
* Suspected cases: 423

**Deaths: 1,823**

**Vaccinated: 181,389**

## Fourth Ebola case found in Congo city, raising fears of faster spread

[_Reuters_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-ebola-congo/fourth-ebola-case-found-in-congo-city-raising-fears-of-faster-spread-idUSKCN1US0XP){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/2/19_

The new case is the wife of a miner who died of the virus earlier this week in Goma, and who only sought treatment more than a week after starting to show symptoms. “This time ... the individual concerned spent time with his family and spent time \[being\] very symptomatic within the community. So we did expect further cases and we are seeing further cases,” said Margaret Harris, a spokeswoman for the World Health Organization (WHO). More than 200 people who came into contact with the man have been tracked and 160 of them vaccinated.

## Ebola in Goma: Rwanda announces the screening of its citizens who have stayed in Goma

[_Actualite.cd via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/08/ebola-in-goma-rwanda-announces-the-screening-of-its-citizens-who-have-stayed-in-goma-actualitecd.html?utm_source=Global+Health+NOW+Main+List&utm_campaign=7f2e5b8ff4-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2019_08_02_03_52&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_8d0d062dbd-7f2e5b8ff4-2888645){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/1/19_

Screening for Ebola symptoms at ports of entry has been ongoing since the beginning of the epidemic and has increased since the confirmation of a case in Goma. About 3000 health workers in high-risk areas have been vaccinated, including more than 1100 in Rubavu district, near Goma. The denial of the Rwandan foreign minister that the county’s border with DRC had been closed yesterday contrasted with several testimonies of DRC citizens living in the Rwandan city of Gisenyi who had not been able to cross into Goma.

## We can’t stop Congo’s Ebola outbreak until communities lead the response

[_New Humanitarian_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/opinion/2019/08/01/Ebola-outbreak-community-response-Congo?utm_source=Global+Health+NOW+Main+List&utm_campaign=7f2e5b8ff4-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2019_08_02_03_52&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_8d0d062dbd-7f2e5b8ff4-2888645){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Amy Daffe, Deputy country director for Mercy Corps in DRC, 8/1/19_

Instead of working with local leaders, outsiders arrived spreading messages that have left communities with more questions than answers. Information has not been well-tailored to different community contexts nor appropriately adapted to local languages or social norms. As a result, cases are being hidden in communities and worryingly the contacts of those that die are largely unknown, making tracing difficult. With a 68 percent fatality rate, this Ebola outbreak is among the deadliest ever (the average rate is 50 percent). We need to engage local leadership, including local chiefs, and bring community groups on board with community conversations targeting caretakers and groups vulnerable to the virus, and train them on the use of education materials, early warning mechanisms, and conflict rumor resolution. An unstable security situation adds to the complexity of the response.

## WHO calls for return to basics to fight DRC Ebola crisis

[_Devex_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.devex.com/news/who-calls-for-return-to-basics-to-fight-drc-ebola-crisis-95393){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Amy Lieberman, 8/2/19_

“The basics are still important, and the basics include good surveillance, good contact identification from an Ebola patient, tracking those same individuals to see if they develop the symptoms, and if they do, testing in isolation to see if they are, in fact, positive,” David Gressly, WHO’s Ebola emergency response coordinator, said yesterday at a press briefing in New York, speaking from DRC. “This is the most difficult environment where an Ebola response has ever been attempted. The environment is difficult because of the high density of population. It is difficult because it is a conflict zone ... It is an area of opposition that has felt marginalized, with a high level of distrust of authorities,” he also mentioned.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 8/1/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1157156153094098948){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

7\. Heartbreaking story about 2 young kids who survived #Ebola but whose families don't want them back because of fear or stigma. I am told this happens during Ebola outbreaks. But I can't imagine the trauma it inflicts.

### Tweet by WHO African Region– 8/1/19

[@WHOAFRO<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/WHOAFRO/status/1156975343846207490){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Dr Marie Roseline Darnycka Bélizaire is an epidemiologist with the @WHO, working to save lives during the #Ebola outbreak in the #DRC. “The work is not done yet, and we will stay here until it’s done,” she says. “I can’t leave with the sensation of leaving something behind”.

### Tweet by Josh Michaud– 8/1/19

[@joshmich<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/joshmich/status/1156940673096044544){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

"What seems to be missing from the narrative here is...You hear people talking about health, but you don’t hear the political scientists and the diplomats talking about peace development and security" @navighealthrisk