---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (8/14/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for August 14th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo
date: 2019-08-14 17:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **5 new cases** as of August 13th.

2 patients who were treated with the new Ebola experimental drugs in Goma have returned to their home.

Expert continue to warn that Ebola will not be vanquished by vaccines and drugs alone.

UNICEF and partners have registered 1,380 orphans from Ebola since the start of the ongoing outbreak.

Butembo doctors suspended their partial strike, due to "significant advances" in the treatment of their colleagues accused of involvement in the murder of WHO Epidemiologist, Richard Mouzoko.

### Recommended reading: 

[What the Failures of the Last Ebola Outbreak Can Teach Us About the Future<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/article/what-the-failures-ebola-outbreak-teach-future/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 2,842** 

* Confirmed cases: 2,748
* Probable cases: 94
* Suspected cases: 373

**Deaths: 1,898**

**Vaccinated**: **192,257**

## 2 Ebola patients in Congo “cured” with drugs, say doctors

[_Washington Post_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/2-ebola-patients-in-congo-cured-with-new-drugs-say-doctors/2019/08/13/a6129534-bdd9-11e9-a8b0-7ed8a0d5dc5d_story.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Saleh Mwanamilongo, 8/13/19_

Esperance Nabintu rejoiced that she and her 1-year old son had survived Ebola. “May the Lord be praised, I thank the Lord very much. I and my child were sick with Ebola, but God has just healed us. My brothers, we must not doubt. Ebola exists, “said Nabintu, whose husband was the second Ebola victim to die in Goma. The response team accompanied the two former patients their home in the Kiziba area, where the medical team educated the residents about proper Ebola treatment. “People who come from Beni and Butembo must be carefully examined, “said Dr. Jean-Jacques Muyembe, director of Congo’s National Institute for Biomedical Research. “All of the 200 contacts we are following are doing well. We are waiting until the end of the 21-day surveillance period. We are at day 13, so there are still 8 days to go before we can say that Goma has won against Ebola.”

## Modern science has delivered the world powerful tools to defeat Ebola. It is not enough

[_STAT_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.statnews.com/2019/08/14/modern-science-has-delivered-the-world-powerful-tools-to-defeat-ebola-it-is-not-enough/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Helen Branswell, 8/14/19_

This week, health officials announced that for the first time, a clinical trial had shown an Ebola treatment was helping people survive the virus. “I think the news today is fantastic. It gives us a tool in our toolbox against Ebola. But it doesn’t in itself stop Ebola,” Dr. Mike Ryan, who runs the World Health Organization’s health emergencies program, told reporters in reaction to the Ebola treatment news. The challenging conditions on the ground have meant the outbreak response has never had a complete picture, in real time, of where the virus is spreading. People in the region, distrustful of their government and of outsiders, haven’t always cooperated with the response; at times some actively work against it. People in the region have also hidden their sick, caring for them in the community. “Unless behaviors change, drugs and vaccines can only do so much,” said Jeremy Konyndyk, a senior policy fellow at the Center for Global Development, who in late April led a mission to DRC. Dr. Jean-Jacques Muyembe, who now leads DRC’s response, is using every chance he has to try to turn that narrative around. “Ebola is not synonymous with death,” he said on Tuesday. “Rather, Ebola is curable.”

## Number of children orphaned or left unaccompanied by Ebola in the Democratic Republic of the Congo rising fast

[_UNICEF_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/number-children-orphaned-or-left-unaccompanied-ebola-democratic-republic-congo?utm_source=Global+Health+NOW+Main+List&utm_campaign=c490be26a3-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2019_08_13_12_20&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_8d0d062dbd-c490be26a3-2888645){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/13/19_

Since the ongoing outbreak declaration, 2,469 children have been separated from their parents or caregivers due to Ebola. "Children are watching parents die in front of them or seeing loved ones taken to Ebola treatment centers, uncertain of when or if they will return. They are struggling with grief and anxiety, while having to comfort and care for younger siblings. Many face discrimination, stigmatization and isolation," says Pierre Ferry, UNICEF’s head of child protection programmes in the DRC. UNICEF’s psychosocial teams provide dedicated care for these children that includes food, psychological support and material assistance. The needs are longer-term for children orphaned by Ebola; psychosocial assistants work to place the children with relatives or foster families — no easy task given the economic burden of raising extra children and the fear of catching the disease or being associated with it.

## DRC Ebola: Reassured of bail or under house arrest of colleagues, Butembo doctors suspend strike slogan

[_Actualite.cd via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/08/drc-ebola-reassured-of-bail-or-under-house-arrest-of-colleagues-butembo-doctors-suspend-strike-slogan.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/13/19_

Yesterday, the local unit of the Butembo Medical Association decided to suspend their partial strike, launched last weekend to demand the release of their three colleagues arrested in connection with the murder investigation of Dr. Richard Mouzoko. "After the inventory, we note significant advances: the conditions of temporary release and / or house arrest are defined and started, the sick colleague is transferred to a hospital in the place where he began to receive care. Thus, we, members of the Butembo Cell Corporation, concerned about the well-being of the population, having taken into account the situation of the epidemic in the face of Ebola virus disease, today an international emergency, decide: the suspension of the slogan of the strike, the establishment of a monitoring team for the realization of the promises of bail and / or house arrest," reads their release.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Kenneth Roth– 8/14/19

[@KenRoth<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/KenRoth/status/1161587114913517569){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

While the world focuses on Ebola in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo (because it might threaten them), armed groups in the two Kivu provinces there have killed 1,900 civilians and abducted more than 3,300 others in the past two years. [https://trib.al/oghZRe7](https://trib.al/oghZRe7 "https://trib.al/oghZRe7")

### Tweet by UN Geneva– 8/14/19

[@UNGeneva<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/UNGeneva/status/1161584749934260234){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

With two new drugs that show up to 90% survival rate, we’re now closer to finding an effective treatment for #Ebola – @WHO spox Christian Lindmeier briefed the press in Geneva on the situation in the #DRCongo.

### Tweet by Chinedu– 8/13/19

[@ojembaenweilo85<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/ojembaenweilo85/status/1161269529101705218){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Is this an improvement to what we had previously? It is. Why the caution? In public health, misinformation is as dangerous as lack of treatment may even be worse. This whole frenzy of Ebola is curable may have a huge negative impact on the management of the outbreak.