---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (7/11/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for July 11th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo
date: 2019-07-11 14:15:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
A fresh outbreak of fighting in Ituri province means that thousands of families may be forced to flee across the Ebola zone of neighboring North Kivu. An expert warns that if the international community does not step up their actions, **we can expect Ebola to spread and kill more people, tear more families apart, and leave countless more children orphaned**.

There were **9 new cases** as of July 10th.

Ronald Klain and Daniel Lucey encourage the WHO to reconvene and declare the current outbreak a public health emergency.

### Recommended reading: 

[How the DRC’s Ebola crisis has led to children dying from measles<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://theconversation.com/how-the-drcs-ebola-crisis-has-led-to-children-dying-from-measles-119946?utm_medium=amptwitter&utm_source=twitter){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## WHO AFRO Dashboard/DRC MoH Stats 

[DRC MoH Statistics<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://mailchi.mp/sante.gouv.cd/ebola_kivu_10juil19?e=34c0620338){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases in DRC: 2,437**

* Confirmed cases: 2,343
* Probable cases: 94
* Suspected cases: 358

**Deaths in DRC: 1,646**

**Vaccinated in DRC: 156,851**

## A new wave of violence in DRC could cause Ebola to spiral out of control

[_Telegraph_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/global-health/science-and-disease/new-wave-violence-drc-could-cause-ebola-spiral-control/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Agoustou Gomis, 7/11/19_

Humanitarian agencies have been warning for months that Ebola is spiralling out of control, threatening a repeat of the West Africa outbreak. Health workers and humanitarian staff remain worked to the bone, trying to halt the outbreak in a war zone while fighting for desperately-needed resources. Part of the distrust that has hampered aid workers is resentment about apathy over long-term health problems like cholera and measles. Health workers in Uganda appear to have averted an international catastrophe for now, but the risk remains high in other neighbouring countries. Dr. Agoustou Gomis cautions world leaders not to wait until Ebola is threatening your own borders before acting.

## It’s time to declare a public health emergency on Ebola

[_Washington Post_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/its-time-to-declare-a-public-health-emergency-on-ebola/2019/07/10/c77641fc-a327-11e9-b732-41a79c2551bf_story.html?utm_campaign=ad1e176747-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2019_07_10_12_34&utm_medium=email&utm_source=Global%20Health%20NOW%20Main%20List&utm_term=.d40800e110c2){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Ronald A. Klain and Daniel Lucey, 7/10/19_

The failure to make such a declaration, fairly or unfairly, has fed global complacency about the outbreak, which in turn is edging us closer to the brink of true disaster. **Such a declaration does not require border closures or trade or travel restrictions, as some fear**. These restrictions would make the current response less effective, not more. Declaring an emergency and accelerating the response ultimately reduce the risk that such unproductive measures are imposed; it is the current threat of unchecked escalation of the outbreak that makes these measures more likely. A declaration might also get the United States to do more to help fight Ebola in Congo. While the Trump administration has taken some positive steps, it has not been on par with the increasing challenge. A news release last week from the U.S. Agency for International Development was telling: It boasted how much aid the United States has previously sent to fight the disease, without clearly promising to send any more. That’s not going to change anything on the ground. This is the second-largest Ebola outbreak in history, and it will only get worse as it enters its second year.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus– 7/10/19

[@DrTedros<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DrTedros/status/1149022127988838403){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Investing in stronger health systems is the best way to prevent outbreaks like #Ebola. In a globalised world, an outbreak in one country can quickly become a global threat. We are only as strong as the weakest link.

### Tweet by UNICEF– 7/11/19

[@UNICEF<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/UNICEF/status/1149301415019450369){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

The combined threat of Ebola and measles for displaced children in DR Congo is unprecedented. We have a small window to prevent a potentially massive loss of life. @UNICEFDRC