---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (7/31/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for July 31st, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo
date: 2019-07-31 14:50:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
The man who became the second confirmed Ebola case in Goma yesterday, has died today.

There were **11 new cases** as of July 31st.

28% of the total cases have been children aged less than 18 years.

Due to the disproportionately high number of children affected by the outbreak, UNICEF said it would need to triple its budget to tackle the complex crisis.

## [WHO AFRO Dashboard](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 2,698**

* Confirmed cases: 2,604
* Probable cases: 94
* Suspected cases: 366

**Deaths: 1,811**

**Vaccinated** (as of July 27):

* Total: 178,121
* Children <18 years: 34,522

## 2nd confirmed Ebola case in Congo’s city of Goma dies

[_Washington Post_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/2nd-confirmed-ebola-case-in-congos-city-of-goma-dies/2019/07/31/ade2c2fe-b387-11e9-acc8-1d847bacca73_story.html?utm_term=.3b56e2769a85){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_Saleh Mwanamilongo, 7/31/19_

This second case has renewed fears in the bustling city of Goma. The man in his 40s was a miner returning home from an area in northeastern Ituri province where no Ebola cases in this outbreak have been recorded. He arrived in Goma on July 13, started showing symptoms on July 22, and was isolated at an Ebola treatment center yesterday. He could have been exposed to Ebola anywhere between Komanda and Goma as he took motor taxis over a number of days through the densely populated region at the center of the outbreak, Dr. Mike Ryan said. DRC’s Ebola response coordinator, Jean-Jacques Muyembe, said **there appears to be no link between the case and the previous one in Goma that was announced two and a half weeks ago**.

## UNICEF must triple budget to combat Ebola outbreak in DR Congo; complex crisis impacting unprecedented number of children

[_UN News_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://news.un.org/en/story/2019/07/1043491){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_7/31/19_

Over 700 children, more than half of whom – some 57% – were under five years, have been confirmed cases of the Ebola virus. This budget would include about $70 million for epidemic control activities, $30 million to build community capacities in at-risk areas, and another $70 million to deliver essential services. The budget also includes the launch of measles vaccinations to control the double disease outbreak burden faced by North Kivu and Ituri provinces. So far, UNICEF has vaccinated more than 40,000 children against measles, but a massive scale-up was needed.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus– 7/31/19

[@DrTedros<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DrTedros/status/1156472490237059073){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Over 5000 #HealthWorkers have been vaccinated against #Ebola in Goma, #DRC. Health centres have been provided with training and equipment to improve infection prevention and control. Screenings at border crossings have been reinforced & 24h monitoring implemented at the airport.

### Tweet by Amy Maxmen– 7/31/19

[@amymaxmen<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/amymaxmen/status/1156564508342571015){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

I’d bet a blood sample from the father who just died of #Ebola in #Goma is being sent to #Kinshasa #DRC where researchers will sequence the virus genome & match it to others so they know where he was infected. The value of a technology is in its use!