---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (11/4/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for November 4th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-11-04 15:30:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **no new case** reported on November 3rd.

A DRC journalist who broadcast information about Ebola was stabbed to death on Saturday at his home in the Ituri province, a hotspot of the outbreak.

DRC medical authorities have received the first shipment of the Johnson & Johnson (J&J) Ebola vaccine.

### Recommended reading: 

[This Congolese Doctor Discovered Ebola But Never Got Credit For It — Until Now<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2019/11/04/774863495/this-congolese-doctor-discovered-ebola-but-never-got-credit-for-it-until-now){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of November 3)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,274**

* Confirmed cases: 3,157
* Probable cases: 117
* Suspected cases: 513

**Deaths: 2,185**

**Vaccinated**: **246,627**

## Anti-Ebola fighter killed as new vaccine arrives in Congo

[_Deutsche Welle_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_11/3/19_

The motive for killing Papy Mahamba Mumbere, a 35-year-old radio host in the town of Lwemba, Ituri, remains unknown. On the afternoon of November 2 unidentified individuals with white weapons \[knives\] murdered him at his home. After having mutilated the journalist, the assailants also wounded his wife before setting his residence on fire. Mr Mahamba had just hosted an Ebola awareness programme on a community radio station when the attack took place.

## The Ministry of Health and the United Nations condemn attack on health worker supporting the Ebola response in the Democratic Republic of the Congo

[_Africa News_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.africanews.com/2019/11/04/the-ministry-of-health-and-the-united-nations-condemn-attack-on-health-worker-supporting-the-ebola-response-in-the-democratic-republic-of-the-congo/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_11/4/19_

The interministerial technical secretariat of the response to the Ebola outbreak, the Ministry of Health and their partners from the United Nations (WHO, UNICEF and UNEERO) strongly condemned this act of violence. Mahamba reported for a community radio station in Lwemba and raised awareness of Ebola to his community. Authorities have begun an investigation of the murder and are looking into its connection to the Ebola response. Two suspects have been apprehended. Since 1 January 2019, WHO has documented more than 300 attacks on health care that have caused 6 deaths and 70 injuries of health care workers and patients in the country.

### First shipment of new Ebola vaccine arrives in DR Congo

[_Medical Xpress_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://medicalxpress.com/news/2019-11-shipment-ebola-vaccine-dr-congo.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_11/3/19_

The health ministry for the eastern province of North Kivu said that a preliminary batch of 11,000 doses of the new Ad26-ZEBOV-GP vaccine manufactured by J&J had arrived on Friday. In all, a shipment of a total 50,000 doses is being sent to the DRC. Until now, the only vaccine used in DRC was one manufactured by Merck.

WHO had been pushing Kinshasa for months to approve the use of the J&J vaccine—an experimental product— to protect those living outside of direct transmission zones. The J&J vaccine had been rejected by DRC's former health minister Oly Ilunga, who cited the risks of introducing a new product in communities where mistrust of Ebola responders is already high. But Ilunga's resignation in July appeared to have paved the way. Jean-Jacques Muyembe said the J&J vaccine would be used from mid-November with the operation being launched simultaneously in DRC and Rwanda.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus– 11/3/19

[@DrTedros<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DrTedros/status/1191082601928417285){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

I am saddened & very concerned about the murder of a community worker who was also a journalist in #DRC. He helped people understand how to protect themselves against #Ebola. This kind of violence is unacceptable. We stand with partners in condemning it.

### Tweet by David Gressly– 11/4/19

[@DavidGressly<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1191371828075384834){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Celebrating the opening of @radiookapi in Butembo in presence of the mayor’s representative by spilling “un sucré” - a soda - on the steps of the radio in line with Congolese traditions. We also held a minute of silence in memory of the journalist Papy Mahamba. #PlusJamaisCa

### Tweet by Laurie Garrett– 11/3/19

[@Laurie_Garrett<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/Laurie_Garrett/status/1191080168070221824){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

More health workers are now dying in #DRC armed assaults on #Ebola efforts than from the virus.

This is beginning to remind me of #polio fighters in Pakistan.

### Tweet by WHO African Region– 11/3/19

[@WHOAFRO<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/WHOAFRO/status/1190944363855122438){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Motorcyclists in #Mangina, #DRC join forces with @WHO to raise awareness of #Ebola.

The unsung heroes in this response! Able to go where most transport can't in rural areas, they take people to vaccination sites. Unfortunately they are also at risk of contracting the disease.