---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (7/30/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for July 30th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo
date: 2019-07-30 15:45:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
Pierre Kangudia Mbayi has been appointed as acting DRC Minister of Health.

There were **16 new cases** as of July 30th.

Health experts agree that the experimental Ebola vaccine has saved many lives in DRC. But after one year -- and more than 170,000 doses -- the outbreak shows few signs of slowing.

To strengthen South Sudan’s ability to quickly respond in the event of an Ebola outbreak, UNICEF is supporting the national Ebola preparedness efforts in the country.

### Recommended reading:

[Why an 'America First' approach won't work in Ebola pandemic<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://thehill.com/opinion/healthcare/455076-why-an-america-first-approach-wont-work-in-ebola-pandemic){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 2,687**

* Confirmed cases: 2,593
* Probable cases: 94
* Suspected cases: 321

**Deaths: 1,798**

**Vaccinated** (as of July 27): **178,121**

## DRC: Pierre Kangudia, Acting Minister of Health

[_Actualite.CD_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://actualite.cd/2019/07/30/rdc-pierre-kangudia-ministre-de-la-sante-par-interim){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_7/30/19_

Today, Pierre Kangudia Mbayi was appointed as the interim health minister for DRC, replacing Oly Ilunga who resigned on July 22. In a [tweet](https://twitter.com/OlyIlunga/status/1156209186692354048), Ilunga thanked all “national and international health heroes” that have contributed to the health agenda in DRC. Pierre Kangudia is also DRC’s budget minister.

## Ebola Vaccine Use in Congo Slowed by Distrust

[_VOA_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://learningenglish.voanews.com/a/ebola-vaccine-use-in-congo-slowed-by-distrust-/5016717.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_7/29/19_

Dr. Joanne Liu, President of Doctors Without Borders, said the vaccine is not “the miracle we wanted it to be.” She also mentioned that “the fact that we’ve used so much vaccine, and the epidemic hasn’t stopped, shows us that contact tracing is not great.” WHO officials say as many as 90 percent of those able to get the vaccine accepted it. But that percentage only includes people who gave contact tracers enough information to be put on a list. The success rate does not include those who distrusted health workers and fled or could not be found. “The rumors were if you got vaccinated you would die,” said Liboke Kakule Muhingi, a 43-year-old farmer in Mangina where the epidemic began last August. Liboke’s mother was among the first to die and six of his sisters also were killed by Ebola after caring for their sick mother. The WHO and DRC health ministry now are offering the vaccine to anyone who wants it.

## UNICEF ramps up Ebola prevention efforts as South Sudan assessed as ‘high-risk’ country

[_UNICEF_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/unicef-ramps-ebola-prevention-efforts-south-sudan-assessed-high-risk-country){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_7/29/19_

UNICEF South Sudan is focusing on and engaging populations that are most at risk in the states bordering DRC and Uganda. The UN children’s agency and its partners have trained 450 front-line mobilizers who are knocking on doors, organizing community meetings and engaging religious and local leaders to disseminate life-saving messages. “Our teams and partners on the ground working in the communities confirm that an increasing number of people are now aware of Ebola, and the protection measures they can take to avoid infection,” said Dr Mohamed Ag Ayoya, the country’s UNICEF Representative. UNICEF South Sudan needs USD 4.3 million to fund Ebola prevention and preparedness activities until the end of September.

## Twitter

### Tweet by WHO African Region– 7/30/19

[@WHOAFRO<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/WHOAFRO/status/1156180009175961603){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

As #DRC experiences its worst Ebola outbreak, @AfricaCDC & @WHO encourage African countries to continue to show solidarity & keep borders open. Restricting travel & trade harms response operations & compromise economies. ➡ [https://bit.ly/2YdBeTX](https://bit.ly/2YdBeTX "https://bit.ly/2YdBeTX")

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 7/30/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1156213921507946496){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

2\. As I mentioned yesterday, there has been another health worker infection, at Masereka. This person was vaccinated (no indication if a while back or close to the date of exposure). This makes the 146th health worker infected with #Ebola in this outbreak; 41 have died.