---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (12/4/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for December 4th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-12-04 15:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **no new case** reported on December 4th.

Protests against UN peacekeepers and national security forces continue in DRC’s northeast for their perceived failure to protect civilians following last week’s deadly rebel attacks.

The European Commission announced on December 2 that it is allocating €50 million of aid to fight Ebola and malnutrition in the DRC. The pledge took place in Addis Ababa during the “Africa Against Ebola: A Private Sector and Partners Forum” organized by the African Union.

### Recommended reading:

[We won't achieve zero Ebola cases in Congo until we get the language right<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/opinion/2019/12/03/ebola-epidemic-Congo-language-communication){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of December 4)

[WHO Afro Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,313**

* Confirmed cases: 3,195
* Probable cases: 118
* Suspected cases: 367

**Deaths: 2,206**

**Vaccinated**:

* **255,650** (Merck Vaccine)
* **872** (J&J Vaccine)

## Unrest in DRC hinders efforts to eradicate Ebola epidemic, UN says

[_Business Day_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.businesslive.co.za/bd/world/africa/2019-12-03-unrest-in-drc-hinders-efforts-to-eradicate-ebola-epidemic-un-says/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_12/3/19_

The DRC’s northeast region is seeing protests against UN peacekeepers and national security forces for their failure to halt the ongoing violence that left several health workers and civilians dead in last week’s attacks. Demonstrators in the town of Beni have burnt government buildings and attacked UN peacekeepers, and a Congolese policeman and three protesters died on Monday during further clashes, according to UN sources. Police arrested about 30 protesters, including several members of local armed groups. Violence in the Beni region has increased since last October, with more than 1,000 killed in the past 5 years. The uptick in violence has led to calls for UN peacekeepers to leave DRC after 20 years. The force, once the UN’s largest, will be reduced to about 13,000 troops in January.

## EU allocates €50 million to fight Ebola and malnutrition in the Democratic Republic of Congo

[_European Commission_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_19_6653){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_12/1/19_

The European Commission has announced €50 million to help the most vulnerable people affected by the Ebola epidemic in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The funding will address urgent needs and provide continued support to the Congolese population. The bulk of the funding, €40 million, will provide access to free and quality health care, including for malnutrition, for those living in Ebola affected areas. The remaining €10 million will help tackle the food security crisis in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the second most serious such crisis in the world. The announcement was made in Addis Ababa on 2 December by the EU Ambassador to the African Union, Ranieri Sabatucci, during the “Africa Against Ebola: A Private Sector and Partners Forum” organized by the African Union.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Dr. Matshidiso Moeti – 12/4/19

[@MoetiTshidi<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/MoetiTshidi/status/1202169092096086016){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Today the city of #Butembo #DRC marks 42 days without a new confirmed case of #Ebola. We salute the extraordinary dedication of our @WHO teams, partner @MinSanteDRC and staff in the Ebola Treatment Centre in reaching this hard-won milestone.

### Tweet by WHO African Region – 12/4/19

[@WHOAFRO<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/WHOAFRO/status/1202191019095285760){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

“You are heros. You had the courage & chose to come here. You have saved lives and have done us proud that #Ebola will not be able spread to another county or another continent.” Dr Yoti, @WHO AFRO regional emergencies director, while meeting Ebola response staff in #Goma #DRC.

### Tweet by Helen Branswell – 12/3/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1201992137820254208){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

There were 0 #Ebola cases yesterday; 2 deaths were reported. The response remains paralyzed at Beni, Mangina & Biakato — exactly the places where a full-court press is needed. There's no alternative; response workers must be protected. But this gives the virus the advantage.