---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (9/16/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for September 16th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-09-16 14:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **4 new cases** as of September 15th.

DRC’s former health minister, Oly Ilunga, has been taken into police custody over the alleged mismanagement of funds earmarked for the country's response to the ongoing Ebola epidemic.

Secretary Alex Azar, along with others, toured an Ebola treatment center in Butembo. They observed infection prevention and control measures and participated in a discussion with local community leaders and health personnel.

### Recommended reading: 

[Tanzania Govt Defuses Ebola Scare As Doctor Dies in Dar es Salaam<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://allafrica.com/stories/201909160216.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of September 15)

[DRC AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,129**

* Confirmed cases: 3,018
* Probable cases: 111
* Suspected cases: 475

**Deaths: 2,095**

**Vaccinated**: **220,529**

## DR Congo police detain former health minister in Ebola probe

[_Al Jazeera_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2019/09/dr-congo-police-detain-health-minister-ebola-probe-190914131853843.html?utm_source=Global+Health+NOW+Main+List&utm_campaign=2f162a4ae5-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2019_09_13_12_45&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_8d0d062dbd-2f162a4ae5-2888645){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/14/19_

This weekend, the DRC national police said Oly Ilunga Kalenga was detained because they believed he planned to evade legal proceedings by leaving the country. Ilunga is in police custody and will likely face a prosecutor today; his lawyers declined immediate comment. Earlier this month, his lawyers said he had been questioned by police about his role in managing the Ebola response. Ilunga oversaw DRC's handling of the current outbreak for nearly a year before being stripped by the presidency of that responsibility in July and resigned from the government days later, citing "interference in the management of the response" to the epidemic.

## Secretary Azar Meets with Local Leaders and Visits Ebola Treatment Center

[_HHS News_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2019/09/14/secretary-azar-meets-local-leaders-visits-ebola-treatment-center.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/14/19_

Secretary Azar was joined by Dr. Robert Redfield, Dr. Anthony Fauci, Garrett Grigsby, Adm. Tim Ziemer, and Mike Hammer, Tedros Adhanom Gebreyeus and United Nations (UN) Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator (EERC) David Gressly in Butembo. They spoke to the healthcare providers about how they provide care for patients and saw patients being successfully discharged from the center. The delegation also heard from officials and healthcare workers about the challenges they face due to mistrust and conflict in the region. The delegation heard firsthand from the women’s association leader, the Federation of Commerce, the leader of the cultural associations, the representative of traditional leaders, and an Ebola survivor; they shared their perspectives on how to engage the communities more effectively in the response to combat misinformation and improve outcomes.

## Twitter

### US Africa Media Hub– 9/16/19

[@AfricaMediaHub<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/AfricaMediaHub/status/1173599596783767552){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

.@SecAzar: It’s important for the people of the #DRC to know that the U.S. doesn’t only want to stop the #Ebola outbreak but also wants to improve the overall health of the people of the DRC.

### Tweet by Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus– 9/16/19

[@DrTedros<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DrTedros/status/1173524714083540992){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Great news from Chowe, #DRC, that the last #Ebola positive case there has recovered and left the treatment center. I thank the hardworking response team there who work tirelessly to save lives

### Tweet by WHO Uganda– 9/16/19

[@WHOUganda<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/WHOUganda/status/1173584847526334466){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

"I recognise the incredible hard work that Uganda has done to prevent the spread of #Ebola. #Uganda, Ministry of Health and Minister Aceng have risen to the occasion making the country stand out in outbreak preparedness and response in the continent" said @SecAzar