---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (10/9/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for October 9th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-10-09 16:20:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **1 new case** reported on October 8th.

Although the decline in the number of new cases is encouraging, WHO notes that the recent fluctuations in case numbers must be interpreted with caution, as case reporting is contingent upon the level of access and security.

The patient in Sweden with a possible case of Ebola has tested negative.

Starting next month, the Johnson & Johnson (J&J) Ebola vaccine will be used in DRC.

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of October 8)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,207**

* Confirmed cases: 3,093
* Probable cases: 114
* Suspected cases: 441

**Deaths: 2,143**

**Vaccinated**: **235,389**

## Situation Report - Ebola Virus Disease Outbreak in DRC

[_WHO AFRO_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/328853/SITREP_EVD_DRC_20191008-eng.pdf?utm_source=Newsweaver&utm_medium=email&utm_term=click+here+to+download+the+complete+situation+report&utm_content=Tag%3AAFRO%2FWHE%2FHIM+Outbreaks+Weekly&utm_campaign=WHO+AFRO+-+Situation+Report+-+Ebola+Virus+Disease+Outbreak+in+DRC+-+Sitrep+62+%282019%29){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/8/19_

During mid-September, serious security incidents in Lwemba Health Area, Mandima, stalled outbreak response activities for more than two weeks. Response activities have since resumed but remain limited. Last week, an open forum for discussion and reconciliation was held in Lwemba with partners and civil society to dispel mistrust and enhance engagement in future response activities. **Improved access may result in enhanced case finding and an increase in the number of reported cases from the area.**

Of the approximately 1555 confirmed cases admitted to Ebola treatment centers, 1000 of them, or nearly two thirds, have survived. The reintegration of survivors into community can create opportunities to discuss their experiences and strengthen the participation of local communities in the response. Many survivors are working within the response.

Under Pillar 1 of the Strategic Response Plan, the estimated funding requirement for all partners for the period July to December 2019 is US$ 287 million, including US$ 120-140 million for WHO. **As of 8 October 2019, US$ 60.4 million has been** [**received**](https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/ebola/drc-2019/funding) **by WHO**, with additional funds committed or pledged. Further resources are needed to fund the response through to December 2019 and into Q1 2020.

Under Pillar 5 Regional Preparedness, the funding requirement for all partners is US$ 66 milllion, of which WHO requires US$ 21 million**. As of 8 October 2019, WHO has received US$ 1.6 million**. While some additional pledges are in the pipeline, increased funding for preparedness in neighbouring countries is urgently needed.

## Sweden Ebola: Patient tests negative in Malmo hospital

[_BBC_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-49971597){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/8/19_

Skane University hospital has confirmed that the patient was not infected with Ebola. That person had come into the hospital with symptoms of fever, and tests were carried out because of where the patient had been staying.

## DRC Ebola control: The new vaccine 'Johnson-Johnson' will be used from next month

[_7sur7 via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/10/drc-ebola-control-the-new-vaccine-johnson-johnson-will-be-used-from-next-month.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/8/19_

At a press conference yesterday, Dr. Jean-Jacques Muyembe announced that the J&J vaccine will be used from next November. In May, the WHO expert group on immunization made two recommendations for the use of a second preventive vaccine in DRC. "Our choice fell on the Johnson-Johnson vaccine because it had more biological data in the lab and is already used in West Africa, and it is used in Uganda and Rwanda,” said Dr. Muyembe.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Ambassador Kelly Craft– 10/9/19

[@USAmbUN<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/USAmbUN/status/1181944723428298752){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

\#UNSC on @MONUSCO: The United States commends President Tshisekedi & the new #DRCongo government’s efforts to fight corruption, respond to insecurity, & fight #Ebola. Only concrete action can prove to the Congolese people that this government represents the change they voted for.

### Tweet by Barry Rodrigue– 10/9/19

[@barryr33082845<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/barryr33082845/status/1181948397823168513){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

\#Béni. Mass briefing for about 300 Taxi Moto Drivers. On the Agenda, sick persons, #Ebola contacts transportation in the City or from a province to another. Risk for the Bikers have been pointed out. @morykeita1980 @WHO Field coord & Dr H. Bah attended (pic 1-2). @JuvenalMachozi

### Tweet by L'OMS en RDC– 10/9/19

[@OMSRDCONGO<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/OMSRDCONGO/status/1181848597148684288){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

👇Strong financial support from @BMG_Bund to combat #Ebola in the #DRC