---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (11/7/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for November 7th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-11-07 15:30:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **1 new case** reported on November 6th.

Johnson & Johnson (J&J) has filed for an approval from the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for its two-dose experimental Ebola vaccine, less than a month after the agency recommended approval of Merck & Co Inc’s vaccine.

A new study in _Clinical Infectious Diseases_ reports that 75.5% of Ebola survivors experience at least one new cardinal symptom up to 4 years after infection.

A group with firearms and knives entered the Ngoyo health center in Beni, burning three motorcycles and a building.

Mike Ryan from the World Health Organization (WHO), said that in his 25-year humanitarian career, violence carried out deliberately against health workers and hospitals had never been so bad.

### Recommended reading:

[DRC Ebola: Hundreds of families flock to Ituri following fighting between FARDC and ADF<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/11/drc-ebola-hundreds-of-families-flock-to-ituri-following-fighting-between-fardc-and-adf.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of November 6)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,286**

* Confirmed cases: 3,168
* Probable cases: 118
* Suspected cases: 531

**Deaths: 2,191**

**Vaccinated**: **247,013**

## Johnson & Johnson files for European approval of Ebola vaccine

[_Reuters_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-johnson-johnson-ebola/johnson-johnson-files-for-european-approval-of-ebola-vaccine-idUSKBN1XH1J2){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Tamara Mathias, 11/7/19_

J&J said it submitted two marketing authorization applications to the EMA for its vaccine regimen targeting the Zaire strain of the Ebola virus, and added it was discussing with the Food and Drug Administration the dataset that would be required for U.S. approval. The applications are supported by data from over 10 studies that have tested the regimen in adults and children. This month, DRC health authorities are introducing J&J’s vaccine to counter the current outbreak, where Merck’s vaccine is already in use. J&J’s unit Janssen is also working in collaboration with WHO to enable registration of the Ebola vaccine regimen in African countries, the company said.

## DRC Ebola cases hit 3,285 as transmission rate slows

[_CIDRAP_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2019/11/drc-ebola-cases-hit-3285-transmission-rate-slows){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Stephanie Soucheray, 11/6/19_

The [study](https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cid/ciz1062/5613876?redirectedFrom=fulltext) published in _Clinical Infectious Diseases_ was based on surveys of 326 Ebola survivors from Liberia. Survivors reported high rates of joint pain, headache, vision problems, and fatigue. Of those who experienced new symptoms, 85.8% said the complications interfered with daily life. The authors of the study looked for 26 markers of immune activation and inflammation at quarterly doctor's appointments but found no significant relationship between symptom severity and those markers.

## Beni / Mangina: 3 motorcycles and 1 building burned at the Ngoyo health center

[_Radio Moto Butembo Beni via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/11/beni-mangina-3-motorcycles-and-1-building-burned-at-the-ngoyo-health-center.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_11/7/19_

The incident occurred last night. A source added that the group was looking for the nurse in charge of this health facility. Not having found him, they burned three motorcycles and a bookkeeper's building before leaving. Had it not been for the intervention of the neighboring population at this health facility, all the buildings would already be reduced to ashes. Other sources claim that this village has no police or military position. Only the Mai-Mai militia control this part of the territory of Beni, to the disadvantage of the population.

## Ebola emergency chief decries new attacks on frontline staff, after DR Congo worker death

[_UN News_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://news.un.org/en/story/2019/11/1050551){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_11/4/19_

The “overwhelming impact” had been on local health workers, not international staff, Mike Ryan told a Geneva Peace Week event, in his capacity as Director of WHO’s Health Emergencies Programme. Echoing Dr Ryan’s message of sympathy, WHO Regional Director for Africa, Dr Matshidiso Moeti [tweeted](https://twitter.com/MoetiTshidi/status/1191078083996061696) her condolences to the family and friends of the worker killed in DRC. In 2019 alone, there have been 862 reported attacks on healthcare workers and facilities from just 10 countries, resulting in 173 deaths and 557 significant injuries. “And that probably is a massive underestimation of the problem,” Dr Ryan insisted. He also expressed his sympathies for the families of three UN Migration Agency (IOM) workers killed eight days ago near an Ebola screening point on South Sudan’s border with DRC last Wednesday.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Johnson & Johnson– 11/7/19

[@JNJNews<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/JNJNews/status/1192441648371900417){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

‏Following years of research in collaboration with global partners, Johnson & Johnson is proud to announce submission of license applications from @JanssenGlobal for its investigational Ebola vaccine regimen to the European Medicines Agency.

### Tweet by Laurie Garrett– 11/6/19

[@Laurie_Garrett<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/Laurie_Garrett/status/1192220157285978114){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

ICYMI:

"As three of the US’ senior public hlth officials, we have helped lead the US response to the ongoing #Ebola outbreak in the #DRCongo since it began over a year ago...the outbreak has been a top global health priority for the Trump administration."