---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (12/3/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for December 3rd, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-12-03 16:50:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **no new case** reported on December 3rd.

Ebola response activities remain paralyzed in the Mangina and Biakato for security reasons.

From November 27-December 1, the Epidemiological Surveillance Commission recorded 10 community deaths (8 in Ituri, 2 in North Kivu).

### Recommended reading: 

[Cured but still contagious: How mixed messages on sexual transmission and breastfeeding may help Ebola spread<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/news/2019/11/28/Ebola-sexual-transmission-breastfeeding-women-children){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of December 3)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,313**

* Confirmed cases: 3,195
* Probable cases: 118
* Suspected cases: 304

**Deaths: 2,204**

**Vaccinated**:

* **255,532** (Merck Vaccine)
* **872** (J&J Vaccine)

## WHO AFRO - Outbreaks and Emergencies Bulletin - Week 48/2019

[_WHO AFRO_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://newsletters.afro.who.int/outbreaks-weekly-bulletin/1qo1wxi33fhhdsrg2txgeb?email=true&a=6&p=56080107&t=29558416){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_12/2/19_

As of December 2, North Kivu has declared ‘ville mort’ and response activities have been suspended across the province. Although the decrease in new confirmed cases is continuing, the slowing and actual stopping of response activities in the Biakato Mines area and Mangina Health Zones are of major concern, as is the shutdown of all response activities in North Kivu for two days for the ‘ville mort’. Previous experience has shown that this will potentially have major adverse effects on surveillance, case finding and contact tracing, which could lead to a resurgence in transmission. It is critical that all areas of response remain effective, engaged and fully resourced.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Africa CDC– 12/3/19

[@AfricaCDC<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/AfricaCDC/status/1201791854708166658){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Impressive turn out yesterday as Member States and partners joined @_AfricanUnion @AfricaCDC in raising funds to support response to #Ebola virus disease outbreak in the #DRCongo

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 12/2/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

\#Ebola cannot be eradicated — impossible. Only pathogens that don't have a human host can be eradicated. This outbreak has to be stopped. Future outbreaks need to be stopped quickly. But as long as there are Ebola-carrying bats (& maybe other species) Ebola outbreaks will occur.