---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (10/8/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for October 8th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-10-08 14:30:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **1 new case** reported as of October 7th.

No new deaths were reported yesterday.

A patient is being tested for a possible case of the Ebola virus at a hospital in Malmo in southern Sweden.

Ebola response agents and their facilities are under heavy threat of Mai-Mai militia attacks in Mambasa territory, Ituri province.

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of October 7)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,205**

* Confirmed cases: 3,091
* Probable cases: 114
* Suspected cases: 363

**Deaths: 2,142**

**Vaccinated**: **234,693**

## Swedish Hospital Tests Patient for Ebola, Infection 'Unlikely'

[_Reuters_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-sweden-ebola/swedish-hospital-tests-patient-for-ebola-infection-unlikely-idUSKBN1WN19M){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Anna Ringstrom, 10/8/19_

It was unlikely that the patient had caught the deadly disease, “but we can’t rule it out before we have the test results,” a spokesman at the Skane University Hospital said. Suspicion arose when the patient presented with Ebola-like symptoms in the form of fever, combined with where the patient has been, the hospital’s head of infectious disease said.

## DRC: Ebola response agents threatened by Mai-Mai in Mambasa

[_Radio Okapi via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/10/drc-ebola-response-agents-threatened-by-mai-mai-in-mambasa.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/7/19_

Mai-Mai militia have issued leaflets to announce an imminent attack, the administrator of the territory said on Sunday. Reports say that some residents have already left the outlying areas of Mambasa. According to the administrator of the territory, these armed men launched telephone messages to blackmail the response team. They demand - through these messages - money to organize the funeral of one of their brother who died of Ebola about three weeks ago in Mangina. The deputy coordinator of the NGO CODEPEF, Laurent Keya, indicated that these threats are taken very seriously, because these militiamen have already attacked Lwemba and Bikatato and done damage. The administrator of the territory ensures that all steps are taken to secure the population and response activities. Local sources report that the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC) has intensified patrols in Mambasa center.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 10/8/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1181572025959231490){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Clinical trial of Johnson & Johnson's #Ebola vaccine will begin in DRC in November, @MTamfum, who leads the outbreak response and is principal investigator of the trial, told a press conference there yesterday.

### Tweet by David Gressly– 10/8/19

[@DavidGressly<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1181490534369640450){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

I have no words to express my admiration for this family. After losing their 3-year old, they organized and recorded a Q&A session with the burial team to explain the process to their community and ensure #Ebola never affects their near & dear ever again. #EverydayHeroes