---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (9/6/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for September 6th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-09-06 15:30:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **13 new cases** as of September 5th.

The US Agency for International Development (USAID) has announced an additional $21 million humanitarian aid package directed at the eastern DRC.

A new _Lancet Infectious Diseases_ study suggests that Ebola survivors are at an increased risk of death within the first year of hospital discharge.

Ebola and endemic violence complicate each other in Beni, North Kivu. Several internally displaced persons (IDPs) share their experience.

### Recommended reading: 

[Briefing: Why women and children are at greatest risk as Ebola continues to spread in Congo<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/news/2019/09/05/Congo-Ebola-epidemic-hits-women-children-hardest){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,069**

* Confirmed cases: 2,958
* Probable cases: 111
* Suspected cases: 405

**Deaths: 2,052**

**Vaccinated**: **212,989**

## USAID announces $21 million in Ebola assistance to DRC

[_CIDRAP_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2019/09/usaid-announces-21-million-ebola-assistance-drc){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/5/19_

The new aid package brings USAID's total funding for the DRC's Ebola outbreak to almost $158 million. The United States has not had personnel on the ground in the DRC's outbreak area since September 2018, when all staff were pulled amid growing insecurity threats. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, however, has been assisting a USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team in the DRC.In addition to helping in the DRC, USAID's money will reach preparedness efforts in Burundi, Rwanda, South Sudan, and Uganda.

Meanwhile, data from an observational study conducted after the West African outbreak in Guinea, which tracked 1,130 survivors, showed that mortality in survivors of Ebola virus diseases was five times higher than that in the aged-matched general population, and 64% of the deaths were tentatively attributed to kidney failure. This is the first study to show a significant increase in mortality among Ebola survivors. The authors said further work needs to be done to understand the connection between Ebola and renal failure.

## Oicha IDPs at risk of Ebola contamination

[_Koma Ebola via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/09/oicha-idps-at-risk-of-ebola-contamination.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/4/19_

One of the main settlements for these IDPs is Mwangaza Primary and Secondary School, Beni. The residents share their worries: we wash our hands with soap or ashes after big needs. We want to return to our respective environments, our children suffer here," said a displaced person encountered on the site. "In the fight against Ebola, we try to maintain our latrines, but we do not have appropriate materials. We need support in that direction. We use the same basins to wash the latrines, wash our clothes and wash our bodies, it is serious one is exposed to diseases," says another. During the school year, students and displaced persons alternate. In the morning, the displaced people take their belongings out to leave the classrooms free for the students. And in the evening, they go back there. The school principal also commented on the lack of kits like washbasins, gloves and pitchers. These IDPs have been forced to live in this condition for over 5 years now.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 9/5/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1169760719748964353){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

2\. The DRC's #Ebola report notes it has been a month since responsibility for the Ebola response was given to a committee headed by Dr. Muyembe. It notes a bunch of things that have happened since, including a decline in community deaths & improvements in contact tracing.

### Tweet by Jeanine Baumann– 9/5/19

[@MedResJourno<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/MedResJourno/status/1169600576688152580){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

The Ebola outbreak in the DRC "is the most complex outbreak that the world has seen from a response perspective," @CDCDirector says at #RAForum. It's an example of "science in action" because they're doing clinical research on a vaccine, treatments in a war zone.