---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (7/24/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for July 24th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo
date: 2019-07-24 14:30:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
Suspected rebels from the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) killed 12 people during two attacks in the Beni locality.

There were **15 new cases** as of today, July 24th.

Intensive follow-up of contacts of the confirmed case who arrived in Goma on 14 July continues. No new cases have been reported in Goma to date.

“Taxi-motos” are the lifeblood coursing through Butembo’s arteries, and far outnumber four-wheeled vehicles on the dusty roads of the regional trading hub. They are also a political force that has at times hampered efforts to contain the current outbreak.

A Chinese firm licensed to operate the Kingfisher oil field has halted activities in Kikuube district of Uganda due to an Ebola scare.

### Recommended reading: 

[DRC Ebola: Thoughts on the technical secretariat<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/07/drc-ebola-thoughts-on-the-technical-secretariat.html?utm_source=Global+Health+NOW+Main+List&utm_campaign=80fcbb55d4-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2019_07_23_06_57&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_8d0d062dbd-80fcbb55d4-2888645){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## [WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases in DRC: 2,612** 

* Confirmed cases: 2,518
* Probable cases: 94
* Suspected cases: 402

**Deaths in DRC: 1,746**

The latest vaccination progress remains unpublished, since the ceasing of the health ministry’s daily detailed reports.

## Attack by Islamists in Congo kills 12 in ‘Triangle of Death’ Ebola zone

[_Washington Post_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/africa/attack-by-islamists-in-congo-kills-12-in-triangle-of-death-ebola-zone/2019/07/24/cb2750b8-aded-11e9-bc5c-e73b603e7f38_story.html?utm_term=.6c5ad590a34c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Max Bearak, 7/24/19_

Today’s attacks were carried out in Oicha and Eringite, towns sometimes referred to by health workers as “le triangle de la mort” or triangle of death. “Our activities are seriously negatively affected,” said Marie-Roseline Belizaire, WHO’s deputy manager for the Ebola response. “We cannot access the area.” Since last month, the Islamic State has claimed ADF attacks as its own, saying the group is an affiliate in its so-called Central African Province. Security experts have cast doubt on any tangible cooperation between the two groups. The ADF has never publicly pledged any allegiance to any other group.

## Are motorcycle taxis making the Ebola crisis worse?

[_Guardian_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2019/jul/24/are-motorcycle-taxis-making-the-ebola-crisis-worse){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Finbarr O’Reilly, 7/24/19_

Without the taxi-motos, Butembo grinds to a halt, as it did in May when an accident involving a taxi-moto and a suspected Ebola response vehicle sparked clashes embroiling taxi-moto drivers, armed militia and security forces. With few cars in Butembo, most people rely on moto-taxis for transport. And when people fall ill they call moto-taxis to take them to hospital, increasing the risk of transmitting the virus. Taxi drivers transporting the sick have succumbed to Ebola during previous outbreaks, but even if they don’t get sick themselves, they facilitate the movement of people carrying the virus.

## Uganda: CNOOC halts work in Albertine Graben amid Ebola scare

[_H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/07/uganda-cnooc-halts-work-in-albertine-graben-amid-ebola-scare.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_7/23/19_

The suspension of activities by China National Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) Uganda Ltd follows the death of a suspected Ebola patient at the Buhuka Health Centre on Saturday, July 20. The said patient who reported to the Health Centre with Ebola-like symptoms was a Congolese National who had crossed to Uganda for treatment. CNOOC Uganda Public Relations Supervisor, Amina Bukenya, confirmed that all their field staff in the area have been recalled to Kampala for health safety reasons. She says the decision is in line with the company’s health, safety and environment (HSE) requirements that emphasize the safety of workers at all times, and that the workers will return to the field once the health ministry and other partners assure them that the place is free of Ebola. Sources indicate the Petroleum Authority of Uganda has also advised its staff to suspend activities in the area.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Josh Michaud– 7/23/19

[@joshmich<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/joshmich/status/1153767885946400769){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

One can raise a lot concerns about the PEF, but lack of defined triggers is not really one. In this case, a country other than DRC will have to see =>20 deaths from Ebola to trigger insurance payout (PEF Operations Manual): [http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/168391509719305386/PEF-Operations-Manual-September-13-2017.pdf](http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/168391509719305386/PEF-Operations-Manual-September-13-2017.pdf "http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/168391509719305386/PEF-Operations-Manual-September-13-2017.pdf") …

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 7/23/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1153886435818258437){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

5\. Over the past 21 days, the situation hasn't changed a ton in terms of the pace at which people are getting infected with #Ebola. A reminder: 254 cases historically would have been a huge outbreak, the 8th largest ever. Now it's just 3 weeks of cases in North Kivu-Ituri.