---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (8/16/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: "  \nDaily update for August 16th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern
  Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)"
date: 2019-08-16 15:30:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **9 new cases** as of August 15th.

A 24-year old woman and her 7-month old child have been confirmed as the **first 2 Ebola cases in South Kivu**, DRC. The woman died on Tuesday night.

The cross-border meeting which brought together the DRC, Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi and South Sudan, ended yesterday. Several recommendations were discussed.

### Recommended reading: 

[What This Congolese City Is Doing To Stop Ebola From Spreading<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.npr.org/2019/08/15/751538561/what-this-congolese-city-is-doing-to-stop-ebola-from-spreading?utm_source=Global+Health+NOW+Main+List&utm_campaign=317fdaaed0-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2019_08_15_03_40&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_8d0d062dbd-317fdaaed0-2888645){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 2,861**

* Confirmed cases: 2,767
* Probable cases: 94
* Suspected cases: 353

**Deaths: 1,913**

**Vaccinated**: **192,257**

## Congo Ebola outbreak spreads to new province as epidemic continues to spiral

[_Guardian_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2019/aug/16/congo-ebola-outbreak-reaches-second-province-south-kivu-woman-dead){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/16/19_

The 24-year-old woman had been identified as a high-risk contact of another Ebola case in Beni, more than 700 km north, last month. She traveled by bus, boat and road with her two children to South Kivu. Health officials confirmed that she had been vaccinated with the experimental Merck vaccine. The confirmed cases were reported in the Mwenga area, some way south of the city of Bukavu, which sits on the country’s eastern border with Rwanda. Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO director-general, extended his condolences in a [tweet](https://twitter.com/DrTedros/status/1162327183282581505). Officials on the ground confirmed that a team was sent by air from Goma to Mwenga today to assist with the response.

## DRC Ebola: 10 new cases on August 14, 8 deaths, 4 recoveries

[_H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/08/drc-ebola-10-new-cases-on-august-15-8-deaths-4-recoveries.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/16/19_

From this cross-border meeting, several recommendations emerged, such as the establishment of bilateral collaboration with the DRC, sharing of expertise, and the development of memoranda of understanding, protocols and standard operating procedures to guide many areas. The establishment of common cross-border monitoring and joint response between DRC and the four neighboring countries, as well as the acceleration of emergency health expert travel was also discussed. This two-day meeting brought together health experts from the aforementioned countries and different stakeholders in the response. It was organized by the World Health Organization (WHO) to respond to its July 2019 decision in Geneva to place the epidemic in the DRC as a health emergency of international concern.

## Twitter

### Tweet by WHO African Region– 8/16/19

[@WHOAFRO<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/WHOAFRO/status/1162332801913503744){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Traditional healers are the first point of call for many when they fall sick. Sabimana is one of many such healers in #DRC trained to recognise #Ebola & refer suspected cases to alert centres. Only by engaging all members of the community can we put an end to this outbreak.

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 8/16/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1162347813725986816){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

One of the cases in South Kivu is already dead. Community deaths generally mean more cases coming.