---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (9/13/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for September 13th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-09-13 19:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **14 new cases** as of September 12th.

40 confirmed cases were reported this week, the lowest weekly incidence since March 2019.

WHO’s available funds will close the financing gap only up until the end of September.

Ridgeback Biotherapeutics announced that the FDA has granted breakthrough therapy designation for mAb114, one of the two drugs used and studied in DRC's Ebola treatment centers that stood out as more effective.

### Recommended reading: 

[Congo Ebola Survivor Passes College Exam Taken in Isolation](https://www.nytimes.com/aponline/2019/09/13/world/africa/ap-af-congo-ebola-a-mothers-wish.html)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of September 12)

[WHO Ebola Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,113**

* Confirmed cases: 3,002
* Probable cases: 111
* Suspected cases: 445

**Deaths: 2,077**

**Vaccinated**: **218,717**

## WHO warns it's running out of money to fight Ebola

[_Hill_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://thehill.com/policy/healthcare/461284-who-warns-its-running-out-of-money-to-fight-ebola){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/13/19_

The UN agency needs further resources to fund the response through to December 2019 and is appealing to donors to provide support. Since 1 August 2019, WHO has [received](https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/ebola/drc-2019/funding) about $55 million from governments around the world, just one-fifth of the amount it needs to implement a strategic response plan through the end of the year. Donor nations and philanthropies have contributed about $170 million to WHO since the outbreak declaration on 1 August 2018, including $20 million directly from USAID.

Ebola has disproportionately struck women in DRC, who are more likely to care for sick family members or prepare dead bodies for funeral services. Of the identified cases, 56 percent have been women mand 29 percent have been children under the age of 18. An unstable security situation in the region, where dozens of armed militant groups operate with impunity and where **more than 200 attacks on health care facilities and workers have been recorded**, has kept many more groups on the sidelines. Army snipers now guard some of the Ebola treatment units throughout the region. WHO officials travel in armored cars with armed escorts.

## DRC Ebola total grows by 7 more cases, to 3,091

[_CIDRAP_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2019/09/news-scan-sep-11-2019){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_9/11/19_

Breakthrough therapy designation is intended to speed the development and review of drugs for serious or life-threatening conditions. The drug, mAb114, is a monoclonal antibody isolated from a human survivor of the 1995 Ebola outbreak in Kikwit, DRC. Miami-based Ridgeback Therapeutics plans to work closely with the FDA as they continue to advance their development program for mAb114.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Secretary Alex Azar– 9/13/19

[@SecAzar<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/SecAzar/status/1172547382673838080){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

An honor to meet with Dr. Jean-Jacques Muyembe today in #Kinshasa. Thank you for your leadership in the fight against #Ebola. We are thankful for your multi-decade collaboration with @NIH @NIAID and for the DRC’s work on #Ebola clinical trials with @HHSGOV and @WHO.

### Tweet by U.S. Embassy Kinshasa– 9/13/19

[@USEmbKinshasa<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/USEmbKinshasa/status/1172534093013245955){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Thanks to collaboration between @inrb_kinshasa, led by Dr. Jean Jacques Muyembe, and U.S. Gov’s @NIH, new #Ebola treatments are proving more effective than ever. The fight continues and USA and DRC are in it together. #PP4PP #StopEbola @SecAzar @HHSGov @CDCDirector