---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (8/28/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for August 28th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-08-28 15:30:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **14 new cases** as of August 27th, one of which was in Mwenga, South Kivu.

Yesterday Dr. Oly Ilunga, former health minister of DRC, was questioned about the use of public funds allocated to the Ebola outbreak.

Goma has gone more than 40 days without registering a new case of Ebola.

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 2,997**

* Confirmed cases: 2,892
* Probable cases: 105
* Suspected cases: 393

**Deaths: 1,994**

**Vaccinated**: **206,050**

## DRC Ebola: Dr. Oly Ilunga being heard by the court

[_Topcongo via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/08/drc-ebola-dr-oly-ilunga-being-heard-by-the-court.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/27/19_

Dr. Oly Ilunga was heard in court on the management of funds allocated to the response to the Ebola virus while he was the health minister. Three of the ex-minister's former co-workers, including a doctor, were held in custody. The hearings were part of a preliminary inquiry "into the management of substantial funds provided by the government for the battle against the Ebola virus”. Ilunga resigned from office on July 22 after releasing a letter addressed to President Tshisekedi contesting his entrusting of the response coordination to a technical secretariat directed by Professor Jean-Jacques Muyembe.

## Weekly Bulletin on Outbreaks and Other Emergencies

[_WHO AFRO_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/326596/OEW34-1925082019.pdf){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/27/19_

On 22 August, Nyiragongo Health Zone (which includes Goma) passed 21 days without additional confirmed cases detected, and all contacts completed the 21-day follow-up period. Surveillance and response activities within Goma and surrounding areas will continue. The lack of further cases in Goma underlines how effective proven public health measures can be when implemented immediately and effectively. This also emphasizes how important response preparedness continues to be in both unaffected provinces and in neighboring countries.

Meanwhile, cases continue to be reported among health workers, with the cumulative number infected rising to 155 (5% of all confirmed and probable cases), and 41 deaths.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Matthew Rycroft– 8/28/19

[@MatthewRycroft1<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/MatthewRycroft1/status/1166735352352190464){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

We are fast-approaching 2000 deaths from the current #Ebola crisis in the #DRC. This is a shocking figure which goes to show just how important it is that we provide support. #UKaid has been a leading donor from the start. Let’s #EndEbola

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 8/27/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1166525685042700288){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

2\. To date 2 of the 5 #Ebola cases have died — the woman & the 2nd child. Mwenga is important because if the virus takes off there it's a whole new region, far from the main outbreak. Adds considerably to the complexity. Fingers crossed this can be contained.

### Tweet by Laurie Garrett– 8/27/19

[@Laurie_Garrett<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/Laurie_Garrett/status/1166428049673543682){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Violence spurs public health action. #DRCongo #Ebola