---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (10/17/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for October 17th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-10-17 15:15:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **1 new case** reported on October 16th.

The proportion of confirmed cases listed as contacts has decreased in the past week from 57% to 13%, the lowest since mid-January.

Curtailing Ebola in Goma motivates the community to confront other diseases with handwashing.

Goma residents talk about the challenge of gathering water amidst Ebola fight.

A new computer model might make it easier to predict the next Ebola outbreak.

### Recommended reading:

[Climate crisis raises risk of more Ebola outbreaks<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.cnn.com/2019/10/15/health/climate-crisis-ebola-risks/index.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of October 16)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,228**

* Confirmed cases: 3,114
* Probable cases: 114
* Suspected cases: 529

**Deaths: 2,153**

**Vaccinated**: **238,700**

## Democratic Republic of Congo: Ebola Virus Disease - External Situation Report 63

[_WHO AFRO_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/SITREP_EVD_DRC_20191015-eng.pdf){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/15/19_

In the 21 days from 23 September to 13 October, the number of affected health areas has decreased, with 22 health areas and 10 health zones reporting new cases. The majority of confirmed cases reported during this period come from Ituri province. Following the declaration of the ongoing Ebola outbreak as a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC) on 17 July, the Director-General will reconvene the Emergency Committee under the International Health Regulations (IHR) on 18 October to review and determine if the event still constitutes a PHEIC.

Under Pillar 1, the estimated [funding](https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/ebola/drc-2019/funding) requirement for all partners for the period July to December 2019 is US$ 287 million, including US$ 140 million for WHO. As of 15 October 2019, US$ 65.8 million has been received by WHO, with additional funds committed or pledged. Under Pillar 5, the funding requirement for all partners is US$ 66 million, of which WHO requires US$ 21 million. As of 15 October 2019, WHO has received US$ 3.8 million.

## Defeating Ebola in the Democratic Republic of the Congo motivates a community to confront other diseases with handwashing

[_WHO AFRO_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.afro.who.int/news/defeating-ebola-democratic-republic-congo-motivates-community-confront-other-diseases){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/15/19_

After the first Ebola patient was confirmed in Goma, a massive campaign was launched to encourage communities to practise better hygiene, especially handwashing, to stop transmission of the virus. Now Goma’s success is being accelerated by the Ministry of Health with WHO support to not only stop Ebola but other diseases, like cholera and typhoid, which are prevalent in the area. It is not enough to just wash hands. The point is to eliminate all germs that cause disease and create new hygiene habits in the community. This message, says Dr Hakizimana, has failed to take root in the country in the past. The message seems to be sinking in along the Kiziba community, where school children line up for a tutorial from a health worker on how to properly wash hands, and take turns following the prescribed steps to apply water, soap and scrub.

## Residents In Goma Are Struggling To Gather Water While Fighting Ebola

[_NPR_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.npr.org/2019/10/16/770712198/residents-in-goma-are-struggling-to-gather-water-while-fighting-ebola){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/16/19_

Although Goma sits on the giant Lake Kivu, the city has been without running water for years. At sunrise, men, women and children walk miles to collect water. A resident complained that kids drown in the lake all the time and that the water isn't treated. The irony of which being that Goma hosts the largest U.N. peacekeeping mission in the world, and dozens of charity organizations invest millions in the city monthly; the region also brims with mineral riches.

## New computer model predicts where Ebola might strike next

[_The Verge_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](theverge.com/2019/10/15/20916188/computer-model-ebola-outbreak-predictionclimate-change-poverty){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/15/19_

The model tracks how changes in the environment and in human societies could affect Ebola spread and predicts that outbreaks could be as high as 60 percent by 2070 if the climate continues to warm. The model could eventually be used to figure out where to vaccinate people before an outbreak or allow a government to take measures at borders where sick travelers might spread the disease, says David Redding, a lead author of the study. Whether a community has a strong health care system and ways to detect and track a disease is what can make the difference between a single case of Ebola and a widespread disaster, according to Daniel Bausch, a member of the executive committee of the American Society of Tropical Medicine. In low resourced settings, predictive models like this could help officials and humanitarian organizations to stop an epidemic figure out where to focus their attention.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 10/15/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1184232796430180354){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

2\. A lovely sign: Last week there were more people discharged from #Ebola treatment centers — 27— than there were new cases of Ebola (15). That's a good thing.

### Tweet by David Gressly– 10/16/19

[@DavidGressly<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1184406071575764992){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

On #WorldFoodDay, I want to salute the work of @WFPDRC for the key role they play in the #Ebola response. In a country suffering from one of the largest humanitarian crises in the world, providing well-needed food supplies to survivors or to contacts is essential. #OnEstEnsemble