---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (11/14/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for November 14th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-11-14 15:30:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **1 new case** reported on November 14th.

An Ebola simulation exercise by authorities in Lesotho caused panic in the country and across the border in South Africa.

Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) confirms that the rollout of Johnson & Johnson (J&J) Ebola vaccine will soon begin.

### Recommended reading: 

[Pandemic policy can learn from arms control<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-03452-0?utm_source=Global+Health+NOW+Main+List&utm_campaign=25469e3d11-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2019_11_13_07_49&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_8d0d062dbd-25469e3d11-2888645){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of November 14)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,292**

* Confirmed cases: 3,174
* Probable cases: 118
* Suspected cases: 527

**Deaths: 2,192**

**Vaccinated**: **251,079**

## Lesotho Ebola simulation triggers concerns, South Africa allays fears

[_AfricaNews_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.africanews.com/2019/11/14/lesotho-ebola-simulation-triggers-concerns-south-africa-allays-fears/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_11/14/19_

Reports indicated early Thursday morning that Lesotho’s health ministry mistakenly announced to the press that a woman from South Africa had been hospitalized after testing positive for Ebola. But South Africa’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases, NICD, clarified on Twitter that there was no such case of an Ebola positive patient at least in South Africa. “This was the first small scale field simulation exercise to test preparedness. The NICD BSL4 Lab has not been requested to test suspected Ebola cases for any neighbouring countries. As such, we have not had a positive Ebola case.” Lesotho authorities [also confirmed](https://ewn.co.za/2019/11/14/lesotho-confirms-first-ebola-case) that the earlier information was incorrect and that the case in point was a simulation exercise.

## Rollout of Johnson & Johnson Ebola vaccine begins in Congo

[_Reuters_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://af.reuters.com/article/topNews/idAFKBN1XO1MF-OZATP){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Fiston Mahamba and Hereward Holland, 11/14/19_

The J&J vaccine, which has passed clinical trials but has never been tested in a real-world setting, will be administered to 50,000 people in Goma, MSF said in a statement. The vaccine, which requires two injections eight weeks apart, will be rolled out alongside another manufactured by Merck, which only requires a single shot. “The introduction of a second vaccine is not meant to replace \[Merck’s\] vaccine, but to complement it and hopefully provide us with an additional tool in the fight against future Ebola outbreaks,” said John Johnson, who is leading the project for MSF. The Merck shot is currently deployed in a strategy known as “ring vaccination”, which aims to control Ebola by identifying and offering the vaccine to contacts of those likely to be infected. The addition of the J&J vaccine will extend protection by providing it to “targeted at-risk populations” in areas where the disease is not yet being actively transmitted.

## Twitter

### Tweet by The Reporter - Lesotho– 11/14/19

[@TheReporterLS<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/TheReporterLS/status/1194993607184437250){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

‏PRESS RELEASE FROM LESOTHO GOVERNMENT ON #EBOLA CASE #EbolaInLesotho

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 11/13/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1194700712564969474){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

2\. Smart move here. The #Ebola response met with deputies of the North Kivu provincial assembly who will be among the first people vaccinated with the new J&J Ebola vaccine when vaccination begins tomorrow in Goma. Lead by example.