---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (11/26/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for November 26th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-11-26 15:30:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **1 new case** reported on November 26th.

Yesterday, the Beni office of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in the DRC (MONUSCO) was damaged after an attack, and staff were redeployed to another site. Angry residents burned the town hall and stormed MONUSCO after rebels killed eight people and kidnapped nine overnight in their latest assault. Residents have protested outside the U.N. for several days over repeated attacks by Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) rebels.

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of November 26)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,304**

* Confirmed cases: 3,186
* Probable cases: 118
* Suspected cases: 392

**Deaths: 2,198**

**Vaccinated**:

* **255,136** (Merck Vaccine)
* **597** (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

## Ebola responders on ‘lockdown’ after Congo city’s unrest

[_AP_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://apnews.com/7377d5a70c60422ab24c6f4cdc06a9f4){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Al-Hadji Kudra Maliro, 11/26/19_

Gunfire could be heard as police and peacekeepers tried to disperse crowds who attacked the U.N. base and burned U.N. vehicles. At least four protesters were killed, a local official said. Almost 50 “non-critical” WHO and UNICEF staffers were evacuated to the city of Goma while 71 remain, spokesman Christian Lindmeier said. He said **the violence is not directed at WHO or the Ebola response at large. Instead, Beni residents are outraged that rebels continue to carry out deadly attacks despite the presence of U.N. peacekeepers and Congolese forces. Some demand that the U.N. mission act or leave**. DRC’s military early this month declared a new offensive against ADF who have killed hundreds of civilians and security forces over the years in the mineral-rich northeast. After the U.N. mission in recent days was accused of inaction, it said it could not carry out operations unilaterally in a region where DRC’s military is already active, and that it cannot participate in military operations without being invited.

## UN mission in DR Congo appeals for calm as violent protests continue

[_UN News_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://news.un.org/en/story/2019/11/1052151){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_11/25/19_

At the invitation of the Government, MONUSCO chief Leila Zerrougui participated in a National Security Council meeting chaired by President Felix Tshisekedi, with ministers and military leaders. Zerrougui stressed that she understood the people’s anger and frustration of the population after further deadly attacks by the ADF. According to news reports, protesters were angry that UN and Government soldiers had failed to prevent an attack by extremist militia. MONUSCO is also concerned about the dissemination of misinformation as well as calls for violence that have been seen on social media. The Mission called on political, religious and media leaders to support a return to calm “which is necessary both to fight the ADF and to continue the response to Ebola.” Around 16,000 blue helmets serve with MONUSCO.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus– 11/25/19

[@DrTedros<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DrTedros/status/1198965013719011328){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

It's the 6th consecutive day #Ebola response operations are paralyzed in Beni & Oicha, #DRC because of insecurity. This could prolong the outbreak. I'm concerned about the well-being of responders & communities. I call on all parties to halt the violence

### Tweet by MONUSCO– 11/25/19

[@MONUSCO<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/MONUSCO/status/1199020184633270274){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

\#DRC #MONUSCO will strengthen cooperation with its partners and work closely with the authorities to jointly find solutions for the people of Beni.

### Tweet by Crawford Kilian– 11/25/19

[@Crof<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/Crof/status/1199040674282127360){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

DRC #Ebola: Security Council decides on the installation of an advanced FA