---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (8/30/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for August 30th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-08-30 15:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
The death toll has now **surpassed 2000**.

There were **12 new cases** as of August 29th.

The confirmed case in Uganda has died, hours after crossing the border from DRC.

Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) continues to advocate for basic health needs that many lack in the affected communities.

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,016**

* Confirmed cases: 2,911
* Probable cases: 105
* Suspected cases: 416

**Deaths: 2,006**

**Vaccinated**: **207,558**

## Congolese girl dies of Ebola in Uganda

[_Africa News_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.africanews.com/2019/08/30/uganda-to-send-back-congolese-ebola-patient-as-deaths-exceed-2000/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/30/19_

The 9-year-old died this morning, becoming the Ebola casualty in Uganda. She had been kept under isolation at Bwera hospital, close to the DRC border. The young girl’s body will be repatriated with her mother back to DRC for a funeral. She had been diagnosed with the disease after crossing from the DRC to Uganda with her mother on Wednesday to seek medical attention. Uganda’s health minister Jane Aceng said Kampala was ready to send back the case if Kinshasa wished to have her treated at home. In June, Uganda handed over three Ebola patients to DRC following an understanding. The news comes as Ebola cases in the DRC top 3,000 and deaths exceed 2,000.

## MSF: 'People will not support the Ebola response if their most basic health care needs are ignored'

[_Actualite.cd via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/08/msf-people-will-not-support-the-ebola-response-if-their-most-basic-health-care-needs-are-ignored.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/30/19_

The lack of community involvement is now the major bottleneck in efforts to combat this epidemic. "People will not support the response to Ebola if their most basic health care needs are ignored," says Tristan le Lonquer, MSF's emergency coordinator in North Kivu. "We need to put local communities at the heart of the response by decentralizing some Ebola-related activities into local health facilities that people know about and supporting access to health care in general” he added. In eastern DRC, inadequate sanitation exacerbates the problem. Oxfam’s National Director in the DRC also calls for more anticipation to prevent the situation and engage communities before they become Ebola hot spots. Oxfam noted that before the last Ebola outbreak, there were only nine doctors trained per 10,000 people in the country.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Dr. Robert R. Redfield– 8/30/19

[@CDCDirector<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/CDCDirector/status/1167424855664484352){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

.@CDCgov has recently doubled the number of #Ebola outbreak response experts in #DRC and will have 30 responders on ground by 9/1 to work on case investigation, contact tracing, disease tracking, community engagement, laboratory testing, border health, and more.

### Tweet by Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus– 8/30/19

[@DrTedros<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DrTedros/status/1167386530396008449){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

The #DRC has one of the largest, most complex humanitarian crises in the world. As I return to DRC this weekend with @antonioguterres, I ask our partners to fulfill the promises they made to communities to help control Ebola & strengthen the health system.