---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (6/25/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for June 25th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo
date: 2019-06-25 14:30:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **8 new Ebola cases** in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) as of June 24th, 2019.

Refusal to believe in the existence of Ebola is one difficulty for doctors who say the current outbreak in DRC is the “**most complex public health emergency in history**" and warn it could drag on for months.

### Recommended reading:

[Ten reasons why we should welcome DR Congo to the EAC<i/>{:class="icon-external-link"}](https://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/africa/Ten-reasons-why-we-should-welcome-DR-Congo-to-the-EAC/4552902-5170314-7xwshjz/index.html){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

## WHO AFRO Dashboard/DRC MoH Stats

[DRC MoH Statistics<i/>{:class="icon-external-link"}](https://mailchi.mp/sante.gouv.cd/ebola_kivu_24juin19?e=34c0620338){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

**Total cases in DRC: 2,247**

* Confirmed cases: 2,153
* Probable cases: 94
* Suspected cases: 269

**Deaths in DRC: 1,510**

**Vaccinated in DRC: 141,754**

## 'Most complex health crisis in history': Congo struggles to contain Ebola

[Guardian<i/>{:class="icon-external-link"}](https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2019/jun/25/most-complex-health-crisis-congo-struggles-ebola-drc){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

_By Peter Beaumont, 6/25/19_

After two deaths across the border in Uganda two weeks ago, officials admit they are struggling to identify and track cases around the north-eastern city of Butembo, particularly in countryside dominated by the Mai Mai militia and where a highly mobile population mean cases continue to emerge. Butembo has seen armed assaults on Ebola treatment centers, the murder of a WHO doctor, and frequent attacks on vaccination teams. “We are looking at one of the most complex health emergencies the world has seen," says John Johnson of Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), whose teams pulled out of Butembo over security risks. Johnson was one of three officials who framed the crisis in similar terms. Moise Kitsakihu-Mbira is a motorbike ambulance driver who discreetly brings the sick to the treatment center from communities where stigma remains. “It was my grandson who died first," Moise tells the Guardian. Many family members touched the body, and then started dying. First his brother, then, one after another, twelve others. “Even when they were told it was Ebola, the family wouldn’t accept it," he says. “**They threw stones at the team sent to offer vaccinations**. They thought it was poison." The man accused of poisoning the family was killed by other villagers. Moise did believe in Ebola’s existence and sought treatment when he too fell sick, despite his local doctor telling him that Ebola was not real. Unlike Beni where the main militia, the Allied Democratic Forces, are located in the countryside, the Mai Mai are embedded within the population of Butembo, with political links. Even by DRC standards, a **strong hostility has emerged here not only to central government but to all outsiders**. Dr Ibrahima Socé Fall, the senior WHO official for the Ebola response in Butembo, described the reaction to the arrival of his teams last year in the midst of national elections. Even those who accepted Ebola’s existence were not necessarily happy to see them. “**The biggest problem has been security. I think if we had the access we need, we could have finished dealing with it a long time ago**," says Socé’s colleague Michel Yao, in charge of the day-to-day WHO response. “Every time there was an incident we would be prevented from working for three to four days. There would be demonstrations, and anyone could be attacked. We became the target."

## Twitter

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 6/24/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class="icon-external-link"}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1143169690136657920?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Enews%7Ctwgr%5Etweet){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

Still no new #Ebola cases in Uganda, where today is Day 11 after the last case died. 108 contacts are being monitored. 846 people have been vaccinated. Another 10 days in this incubation period. Still would love detail on the DRC part of the story of the pastor's funeral.

### Tweet by Lawrence Gostin– 6/24/19

[@LawrenceGostin<i/>{:class="icon-external-link"}](https://twitter.com/LawrenceGostin/status/1143205322376527872){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

Is it a good idea to have retired basketball star Dikembe Mutombo do PSAs to fight Ebola in #DRCongo? Yes. Celebrities can add influential voices to vital health messages. Nigeria stemmed a potentially catastrophic Ebola outbreak during W. African epidemic, using celebrities.

### Tweet by Nigeria Centre for Disease Control– 6/23/19

[@NCDCgov<i/>{:class="icon-external-link"}](https://twitter.com/NCDCgov/status/1142808451447496708){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

There is NO case of Ebola in Nigeria. This is a thread in response to the rumour of an #Ebola case in Port-Harcourt which we detected from the Twitter page of former Nigerian Minister of Aviation (2006) Femi Fani-Kayode @realFFK. This is completely FALSE
