---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (8/19/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for August 19th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-08-19 15:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **11 new cases** as of August 18th.

A third Ebola case has been confirmed in the territory of Mwenga, South Kivu. A new case has also been confirmed in the remote, militia-controlled territory of Walikale, 95 miles from Goma.

Health experts continue to warn that science and public health alone will not contain Ebola.

At least three checkpoints against Ebola virus disease were installed in the [Virunga National Park](https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/63/), located about 30 miles from Goma.

### Recommended reading: 

[Those fighting the spread of Ebola in DR Congo<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/inpictures/people-fighting-spread-ebola-drc-190819065038868.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 2,888** 

* Confirmed cases: 2,794
* Probable cases: 94
* Suspected cases: 387

**Deaths: 1,934**

**Vaccinated**: **197,172**

## Ebola spreads to remote, militia-run Congo territory

[_Reuters_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://af.reuters.com/article/worldNews/idAFKCN1V90ON){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Fiston Mahamba and Djaffar al Katanty, 8/19/19_

Even with better technical tools, the widening geographic spread of the virus, and its presence in yet another zone under the sway of armed groups, raises the risk of it spreading out of control. Walikale is controlled almost entirely by a Mai Mai ethnic militia, surrounded by forest and difficult to access because of poor roads.

## Containing the Ebola outbreak means addressing its root causes: a weak health system and insecurity

[_STAT_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.statnews.com/2019/08/19/ebola-containment-address-root-causes/){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_By Joel G. Breman, 8/19/19_

People in these impoverished and neglected provinces face even worse scourges than Ebola; they regularly die of diseases like malaria, tuberculosis, and routine treatable infections. By diverting scarce health care resources, Ebola exacerbates the toll of everyday diseases. People don’t feel safe and don’t trust the health care system that has failed them for so long; they try to treat infected individuals in their homes, spreading the disease to family members and neighbors. The continuing violence is causing field workers to burn out from fear and exhaustion, and it is becoming increasingly difficult to replace them. The broken health care system must be repaired, so people in poor communities receive proper treatment for all the other common ailments that plague them. Properly functioning hospitals and clinics build community trust.

## North Kivu: ICCN sets up checkpoints to prevent Ebola in the parks

[_Radio Okapi via H5N1_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://crofsblogs.typepad.com/h5n1/2019/08/north-kivu-iccn-sets-up-checkpoints-to-prevent-ebola-in-the-parks.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_8/19/19_

Wenga Mulayi, director of communications for the Congolese Institute for the Conservation of Nature (ICCN), said there has been a slight decline in the number of tourists visiting the Park, since the announcement of the first Ebola case in Goma and the declaration of the epidemic as a global health emergency. He said this decline constitutes a shortfall for the ICCN and DRC. Devices at these checkpoints include temperature testing, handwashing, but also passenger registration for a data bank, when needed.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus– 8/18/19

[@DrTedros<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DrTedros/status/1163150671169957890){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Productive meeting with Pierre Kangudia Mbayi & @DianeGashumba , Ministers of Health of #DRC & #Rwanda. We discussed not only how to work together to contain & stop the current #Ebola outbreak, but to address the wider health needs of affected communities.

### Tweet by Mark Green– 8/18/19

[@USAIDMarkGreen<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/USAIDMarkGreen/status/1163177978412638209){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Productive meeting today with @USAID’s great NGO partners in the #DRCongo, @WorldVision, @IMAWorldHealth, @MercyCorps, @MedAir_DRC, & @theIRC. It’s important to engage #Ebola-affected communities in our response efforts on the ground. Thank you for your great work & coordination!

### Tweet by Helen Branswell– 8/18/19

[@HelenBranswell<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1163251854286970881){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

5\. The worrying geographic spread in this #Ebola outbreak comes at a heartbreaking time. Numbers-wise, August looks quite a bit better than April-July. If cases continue at the current rate — a big if now — the Aug. tally could be \~300 cases. Awful but still better.

### Tweet by World Health Organization (WHO)– 8/19/19

[@WHO<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/WHO/status/1163459029554933760){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

'I know at the end of the road, I will find somebody that I need to save'- @MR_Belizaire, WHO epidemiologist working to stop #Ebola in #DRC. This video shows her at work in the previous outbreak in the Equateur region of the country. #WomenHumanitarians