---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (10/15/19)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for October 15th, 2019 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2019-10-15 14:30:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **4 new cases** reported on October 14th.

A first batch of 500,000 doses of the J&J vaccine should arrive in DRC in a few days.

Malawi health officials have dismissed reports that the first Ebola case has been recorded in the country's border district of Karonga.

### Recommended reading: 

[You’re Swabbing a Dead Gorilla for Ebola. Then It Gets Worse<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/14/health/ebola-gorillas.html){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of October 14)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,224**

* Confirmed cases: 3,110
* Probable cases: 114
* Suspected cases: 383

**Deaths: 2,150**

**Vaccinated**: **237,956**

## As Ebola cases climb, launch of 2nd vaccine in works

[_CIDRAP_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2019/10/ebola-cases-climb-launch-2nd-vaccine-works){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/14/19_

The DRC's Ebola technical committee (CMRE) said the first batch of the Johnson & Johnson (J&J) vaccine, which will include 500,000 doses, will arrive in the DRC on Oct 18 and vaccination will begin in November in two parts of Goma, the capital of North Kivu. The campaign will eventually extend to other provinces. The CMRE added that the vaccine will target the part of Goma that borders Gisenyi in Rwanda. Earlier reports said that Rwanda was also in the process of acquiring doses of the J&J vaccine to vaccinate traders who work along the Rwandan-DRC border, where tens of thousands cross daily. The vaccine, designed to afford longer-lasting protection, is given in two doses 56 days apart.

## Malawi dismisses reports of first Ebola case

[_Xinhua Net_<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2019-10/15/c_138473723.htm){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_10/15/19_

The scare broke on Sunday in Malawi when health workers in the district that borders with Tanzania quarantined one person suspected to have Ebola signs and symptoms. Louis Tukula, environmental health officer for the district, said that the screening for the suspected 37-year-old man had shown that he had a bacterial infection and not Ebola. He said people were now aware of the signs and symptoms, so they were likely to come out and report suspected cases just like the case in question was reported. The Malawian Ministry of Health is reported to be on high alert and authorities are closely monitoring the situation. Hundreds of people from DRC enter Malawi every month.

## Twitter

### Tweet by Ibrahima Socé Fall– 10/15/19

[@DamelSoceFall<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/DamelSoceFall/status/1184003829278359552){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

For the first time since September 2018, there is no #Ebola case in the Butembo treatment center. The two last cases originated from Biakato were just realized. The team continues to strengthen surveillance in all areas!

### Tweet by MSF Western & Central Africa– 10/14/19

[@MSF_WestAfrica<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/MSF_WestAfrica/status/1183789564760121345){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

\#DRCongo - In Beni, ending the deadly Ebola epidemic remains complex task.

@MSF has only recently taken over the large #Ebola Treatment Center with 13 isolation cubes for emergency care, 3 large isolation wards for up to 40 patients, and over 160 staff.

### Tweet by Nature News & Comment– 10/15/19

[@NatureNews<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}](https://twitter.com/NatureNews/status/1184009786448404480){:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

Japan imported Ebola and four other dangerous viruses in preparation for a possible outbreak at the 2020 Olympics.