---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (2/24/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for February 24th, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-02-24 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
The increase in total cases since the previous report includes 11 probable Ebola cases. These cases do not reflect recent transmission and were reported from November 2018-September 2019.

There were 0 **new cases** reported on February 24th.

DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of February 24th)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases:** 3,444

* Confirmed cases: 3,310
* Probable cases: 134
* Suspected cases: 377

**Deaths:** 2,264

**Vaccinated:**

* 297,122 (Merck Vaccine)
* 15,337 (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

[WHO Warns It is Running Out of Money to Tackle Ebola Epidemic in DRC](https://www.voanews.com/africa/who-warns-it-running-out-money-tackle-ebola-epidemic-drc)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_VOA, 2/23/20_

The World Health Organization is urgently appealing for $40 million to salvage its operation to bring the Ebola epidemic to an end in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. The Ebola operation in eastern DR Congo’s conflict-ridden North Kivu and Ituri provinces is on financial life-support. The World Health Organization reports its coffers will be empty at the end of this month. It is urging donors to step up immediately and contribute the money needed to tackle this virulent disease. WHO spokesman Tarik Jasarevic says failure to support this operation would be tragic as good progress is being made in containing the Ebola virus.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by Peter Kilmarx](https://twitter.com/PeterKilmarx/status/1232042906757689344)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 2/23/20

@PeterKilmarx  
 1. No new confirmed cases, but this new information from yesterday was worrisome: "11 nouveaux cas probables, dont 6 au Nord-Kivu, notamment 1 à Alimbongo, 1 Butembo, 1 à Kalunguta, 1 à Katwa, 1 à Kayna, 1 à Mangurejipa, 1 à et 5 en Ituri à 4 Mandima et 1 à Mambasa."

2\. I found the answer: "11 probable EVD cases have been added to the cumulative count since the previous report. These cases do *not* reflect recent transmission and were reported from Nov 2018-Sep 2019"