---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (2/18/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for February 18th, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-02-18 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
Merck’s Ervebo has been licensed by four African countries including the DRC, simplifying the process of stockpiling and distributing the vaccine to high-risk areas.

There was 1 **new case** reported on February 18th.

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of February 18th)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases:** 3,433

* Confirmed cases: 3,310
* Probable cases: 123
* Suspected cases: 334

**Deaths:** 2,249

**Vaccinated:**

* 295,673 (Merck Vaccine)
* 13,358 (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

### [Four countries in the African region license vaccine in milestone for Ebola prevention](https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/14-02-2020-four-countries-in-the-african-region-license-vaccine-in-milestone-for-ebola-prevention)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_WHO, 2/14/20_

The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), Burundi, Ghana and Zambia have licensed an Ebola vaccine, just 90 days after World Health Organization (WHO) prequalification. Registration of the vaccine is expected in additional countries in the coming weeks. The licensing of the vaccine means that the manufacturer can stockpile and widely distribute this vaccine to African countries at risk of Ebola virus disease outbreaks. Once licensed doses are available, use of the vaccine will not require clinical trial or other research protocols. "The approval of the Ebola vaccine by these countries is another milestone in the fight against this unforgiving disease," said WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. “Africa has rallied to cement hard-fought progress to keep its people safe from Ebola."

## 

## Twitter

### [Tweet by David Gressly](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1228297974071091200)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 2/14/20

@DavidGressly

The long awaited moment is here! Goma slammers repeat testimonies of Ebola winners @AmaniFestival to make their voices heard, their challenges, their hopes. A big thank you to them for these beautiful interpretations and their touching stories!