---
keywords: []
title: DRC Ebola News (1/16/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for January 16th, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 
authors: []
series: ''
themes: []
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were 3 **new cases** reported on January 16th.

A healthcare worker in Mabalako has contracted Ebola despite prior vaccination. Health experts express frustration over the role of social media in spreading misinformation about the epidemic.

### Recommended Reading

[Safety and immunogenicity of a highly attenuated rVSVN4CT1-EBOVGP1 Ebola virus vaccine: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 1 clinical trial](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(19)30614-0/fulltext)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

### 

### Recommended Viewing

[How war and misinformation are complicating the DRC’s Ebola battle](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/how-war-and-misinformation-are-complicating-the-drcs-ebola-battle)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of January 16)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases:** 3,409

· Confirmed cases: 3,291

· Probable cases: 118

· Suspected cases: 477

**Deaths:** 2,236

**Vaccinated:**

· 266,632 (Merck Vaccine)

· 5.861 (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

### [Cases traced to Mabalako still fueling DRC Ebola outbreak](http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2020/01/cases-traced-mabalako-still-fueling-drc-ebola-outbreak)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_CIDRAP, 1/15/20_

A known transmission chain from Ayola health zone in Mabalako, a town in North Kivu province of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), is linked to a resurgence of Ebola in Beni health zone, which hadn't seen an Ebola case in 29 days, and new cases in Musienene health zone, where no cases had been reported for 132 days. Both Beni and Musienene are also in North Kivu province. The World Health Organization (WHO) described the transmission chain in its latest situation report on the outbreak, which covered the second week of January. Eight new cases were confirmed from Jan 6 to Jan 12, including three in Beni and one in Musienene. "These four cases are linked to the transmission chain that originated in Aloya Health Area, Mabalako Health Zone, and were not unexpected given known links between Mabalako and Beni," the WHO said.

### [In Congo’s Ebola zone, misinformation persists even as cases slow](https://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/news-feature/2020/1/15/Ebola-Congo-social-media-whatsapp-misinformation)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_The New Humanitarian, 1/15/20_

Fighting the latest Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo has proven deadly – not only to aid responders who have suffered nearly 400 attacks since the outbreak began in 2018, but also to those fighting the spread of misinformation about the disease. According to field surveys conducted by the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), many in the region are still skeptical about the disease and distrustful of the response. Rumors persist – including claims Ebola vaccines are fake, that responders are stealing organs from the dead, that the disease is meant to eradicate those in the opposition stronghold, and that the outbreak is a money-making venture for a select few. While health workers and humanitarian groups have been building strategies to counter misinformation, rumors often proliferate beyond their control on WhatsApp – the most popular messaging app in Congo.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by Helen Branswell](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1217552855315316736)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/16/20

@HelenBranswell

The North Kivu-Ituri #Ebola outbreak shows little sign of letting up — though it looked like it might be ending in Nov. The daily case increase is far lower than at the height of the outbreak (April-May 2019) but cases are accruing steadily in places where resistance persists.