---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (1/13/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for January 13th, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-01-13 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were 3 **new cases** reported on January 13th.

Over the weekend 5 new cases were confirmed, including a new case in Musienene which had been clear for 131 days. UN Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator David Gressly stresses the importance of maintaining vigilance in health zones where the epidemic has been contained.

DRC Army forces clashed with the ADF in North Kivu, leaving 30 soldiers dead.

### Recommended Reading

[Vaccination strategies to control Ebola epidemics in the context of variable household inaccessibility levels](https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0007814)

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of January 13)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)

**Total cases: 3,398**

· Confirmed cases: 3,280

· Probable cases: 118

· Suspected cases: 460

**Deaths: 2,235**

**Vaccinated**:

\- **264,682** (Merck Vaccine)

\- **5,684** (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

### [DR Congo Army says ADF Rebels Killed 30 Soldiers](https://www.voanews.com/africa/dr-congo-army-says-adf-rebels-killed-30-soldiers)

_Voice of America, 1/12/20_

Islamist rebels killed 30 soldiers and wounded another 70, some seriously, during fierce fighting last week in eastern DR Congo, army officials said. They suffered the losses during the latest offensive Thursday against the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), in North Kivu province, Major Mak Hazukai told journalists Saturday. The army captured the ADF's headquarters during the battle at Madina, and killed 40 rebel fighters, including five of their leaders, Hazukai added. On Friday, the cabinet posted a tweet on the prime minister's account congratulating the army on their capture of what they described as the one of the last bastions of the ADF.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by Laurie Garrett](https://twitter.com/Laurie_Garrett/status/1216586032466026496) – 1/13/20

@Laurie_Garrett

Vaccines can't stop #Ebola in a war zone. "We found that ring #vaccination is effective until the levels of inaccessibility exceeds apprx 10%; a combined ring & community vax strategy is effective until the levels of inaccessibility exceeds approx 50%."

### [Tweet by Helen Branswell](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1216420809264156672) – 1/13/20

@HelenBranswell

More bad news in DRC's #Ebola outbreak. There was a case reported Saturday at Musienene. Musienene had gone 131 days — more than a third of a year — without a case. It joins a growing list of places where transmission had been stopped for weeks & has recently been reignited.

### [Tweet by David Gressly](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1216649210059161600) – 1/13/20

@DavidGressly

I cannot stress enough the need to remain vigilant in the face of #Ebola, even after months without cases. We have seen it in several health zones like Mambasa, Butembo and more recently Beni. We must keep good habits and protect our loved ones. #OnEstEnsemble