---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (1/22/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for January 22nd, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-01-22 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were 0 **new cases** reported on January 22nd.

An independent assessment published by the United Nations calls for improved coordination between DRC authorities and MONUSCO in order to improve regional security.

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of January 22)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases:** 3,416

* Confirmed cases: 3,297
* Probable cases: 119
* Suspected cases: 394

**Deaths:** 2,238

**Vaccinated:**

* 270,877 (Merck Vaccine)
* 6.317 (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

### [Joint UN-Congolese strategy needed to address insecurity following deadly attacks](https://news.un.org/en/story/2020/01/1055741)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_UN, 1/21/20_

Authorities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and the UN peacekeeping operation in the country, MONUSCO, are being urged to develop a comprehensive joint strategy to address insecurity in Beni territory, located in the east. The recommendation follows an independent assessment into deadly attacks allegedly carried out by the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) armed group during the latter part of last year, which sparked violent protests against the Government and the UN. Team members were evaluating the MONUSCO Force’s ability to deliver on mandated tasks that include civilian protection, neutralizing armed groups, and providing a secure environment for those tacking the ongoing Ebola outbreak in the region.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by David Gressly](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1219894118488342528)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/22/20

@DavidGressly

Pastor Lunga is healed of #Ebola since December 26 and is now a nurse at the CTE in Biakato where he helps his fellow citizens to overcome the disease. Biakato has not had a case since December 9 and here is his message to everyone that it continues like this: #EverydayHeroes

### [Tweet by Kivu Security](https://twitter.com/KivuSecurity/status/1220022384117403649)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/22/20

@KivuSecurity

8 people (5 men, 2 women and a child) were killed near Mayi-Moya last night. This new massacre attributed to #ADF comes after 3 weeks of relative calm. A total of 246 civilians were killed in the territory of #Beni since early November. #RDC