---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (1/23/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for January 23rd, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-01-23 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were 0 **new cases** reported on January 23rd.

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of January 22)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases:** 3,416

* Confirmed cases: 3,297
* Probable cases: 119
* Suspected cases: 394

**Deaths:** 2,238

**Vaccinated:**

* 271,758 (Merck Vaccine)
* 6,317 (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

### [Winning community trust in Ebola control](https://reliefweb.int/report/democratic-republic-congo/winning-community-trust-ebola-control)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_ReliefWeb, 1/22/20_

Since the outbreak was declared in August 2018, response teams have faced difficulties in their efforts to bring the epidemic under control. In 2019, WHO recorded around 390 attacks on health care facilities. The attacks killed 11 and injured 83 health workers. These attacks have often severely curtailed operations, allowing Ebola to flare up. Recent armed attacks in Beni, Biakato and Mangina threaten the efforts made to control the spread of the virus in the hotspots. Incidents arising from community reluctance to Ebola response peaked in June 2019 when 371 incidents were recorded. A community engagement survey revealed a significant lack of trust in the responders: around 36% of respondents trusted the Ebola responders; a third denied the existence of Ebola and another 30% did not know about the disease. Some 33% believed rumors around the Ebola vaccine.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by David Gressly](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1220241248776224768)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/23/20

@[DavidGressly](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}  
 Moto-taxis play an essential role in Congolese society but are often more exposed to the #Ebola virus. In Biakato, they were trained, equipped with thermoflash and handwashing stations to protect themselves and their community against the disease @UNICEFDRC