---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (1/7/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for January 7th, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-01-07 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **1 new case** reported on January 7th.

Ebola response coordinators host awareness raising activities in Malepe, aimed at improving surveillance. The WHO reports that the measles epidemic has now claimed 6,000 lives in the DRC.

### Recommended Reading 

[‘Against all odds’ - The inside story of how scientists across three continents produced an Ebola vaccine](https://www.statnews.com/2020/01/07/inside-story-scientists-produced-world-first-ebola-vaccine/)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of January 7) 

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,391**  
 - Confirmed cases: 3,273  
 - Probable cases: 118

\- Suspected cases: 568

**Deaths: 2,234**

**Vaccinated**:

\-**261,596** (Merck Vaccine)

\-**4,802** (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

### [Organization of an evaluation session of awareness-raising activities in the Malepe health area in Beni](https://us3.campaign-archive.com/?u=b34a30571d429859fb249533d&id=67a1ed5c43)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_The Ministry of Public Health - DRC, 1/7/20_

The sub-coordination of the response to the Ebola virus disease epidemic organized this Monday 06 January 2020 an evaluation session of awareness-raising activities in the Malepe health area in Beni. According to the Coordinator of this Sub-coordination, Dr. Pierre-Céleste Adikey, this evaluation aims to intensify surveillance around visitors and raise alerts. These strategies, he said, will strengthen the city's protective measures against any likely reinfection of the city. On this occasion, it was announced the resumption of free healthcare within the Malepe health center with the support of the NGO ALIMA which, from now on, provides drugs for the free care of the sick. In addition, the Ebola Treatment Center (CTE) in Mangina unloaded the first eight Ebola survivors in 2020 on Monday. These survivors, who were reintegrated into their respective communities, notably in Aloya / Canteen, testified to good care within this CTE.

### [Deaths from Democratic Republic of the Congo measles outbreak top 6000](https://reliefweb.int/report/democratic-republic-congo/deaths-democratic-republic-congo-measles-outbreak-top-6000)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_ReliefWeb, 1/7/20_

With the death toll from the world's worst measles epidemic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) surpassing 6000, the World Health Organization (WHO) is calling for more funding to stop the outbreak. Lack of funding remains a huge impediment to successfully curbing the outbreak. So far, US$ 27.6 million have been mobilized. "We recognize the Government's engagement in the efforts to end the outbreak and we are grateful for the generosity of our donors. But we still need to do more," said Dr Amédée Prosper Djiguimdé, Officer in charge of WHO office in the DRC. "Thousands of Congolese families need our help to lift the burden of this prolonged epidemic from their backs. We cannot achieve this without adequate finances."

### Twitter

### [Tweet by Helen Branswell](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1214593473363488768)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/7/20

@HelenBranswell

This is so tragic: The #measles death toll in an epidemic in #DRC has surpassed 6,000. That's nearly 3x as many deaths in the current long-running #Ebola outbreak. 