---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (1/3/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for January 3rd, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-01-03 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **3 new cases** reported on January 3rd.

The number of new cases continues to rise in Mabalako, Butembo, and Katwa, after a short lull in December. Health officials attempt to escalate prevention activities in regions not directly affected by violence.

### Recommended Reading 

[IOM SOUTH SUDAN WEEKLY EBOLA VIRUS DISEASE PREPAREDNESS UPDATE](https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/20200102_IOM%20SS%20EVD%20Weekly%20Report%20%2352.pdf)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of January 3) 

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,385**  
\- Confirmed cases: 3,267

\- Probable cases: 118

\- Suspected cases: 292

**Deaths: 2,232**

**Vaccinated**:

\-**260,530** (Merck Vaccine)

\-**4,068** (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

## [Five more Ebola cases confirmed in past 2 days](http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2020/01/five-more-ebola-cases-confirmed-past-2-days)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_CIDRAP, 1/2/20_

Virus activity is still high in Mabalako, Butembo, and Katwa. In a Disease Outbreak News update published today, the WHO said three of four cases reported in Butembo in the past 2 weeks are linked to a transmission chain of more than 50 people that originated in Aloya Health Area, Mabalako Health Zone. The WHO’s African regional office, in an update earlier this week, noted persistent resistance to vaccination in the towns and villages with active transmission. On Dec 28, health officials from the WHO met with 15 village chiefs from Nyankunde Health Zone to begin a dialogue on response activities. In addition to community hesitation, the outbreak region is still battling violence, with a triage health station in Oicha targeted on Christmas Eve, and several threats made in the Biakato Mines area

## [Over 300 people in DRC flee to Uganda over renewed tribal clashes](https://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/ea/Over300-congolese-flee-to-uganda-over-tribal-clashes/4552908-5405990-9r00oo/index.html)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_The East African, 1/3/20_

More than 300 people from neighbouring Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) have fled to Uganda over the past one month, a senior government official said on Thursday. Samuel Araali Kisembo, the resident district commissioner for Kikuube and Hoima districts in western Uganda, told Xinhua by telephone that they are fleeing renewed tribal clashes in Ituri Province in eastern DRC. Kisembo said they used Lake Albert shared by Uganda and DRC. "We are working with the local leadership, the Office of Prime Minister and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to direct these people to the reception centre at Sebigoro," Kisembo said, noting that more people are expected to cross to Uganda. "Our teams are on standby and health officials are available to screen the newcomers of Ebola and other related diseases," Kisembo said.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by Mark Green](https://twitter.com/USAIDMarkGreen/status/1212837680419131399)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/3/20

@USAIDMarkGreen

Great to sit down today with my friend @USAmbDRC to discuss updated efforts to combat #Ebola in the #DRCongo. The eradication of Ebola is a high priority of @USAID's and we will continue to provide support to this region.

### [Tweet by Barry Rodrigue](https://twitter.com/barryr33082845/status/1213167356266131457)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/3/20

@barryr33082845

\#Mambasa today. Educational discussions with Bambute PK6 community in Maloke. Suleiman Onokoko @WHO #RCCE is discussing with people living in the Forest about #Ebola Prevention, #Vaccination, Alerts reports, Safe Burial, Visitors management. The Camp is in Makoko 2 Health area.