---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (1/10/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for January 10th, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-01-10 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was **1 new case** reported on January 10th.

1 new case has been reported in North Kivu. A UN report detailing the scope of ethnic violence targeted at the Hema community in Ituri raises the possibility of investigating ‘crimes against humanity.’

Recommended Reading

[The complex logistics of Ebola response](The%20complex%20logistics%20of%20Ebola%20response)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of January 10)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,393**  
 - Confirmed cases: 3,275  
 - Probable cases: 118

\- Suspected cases: 480

**Deaths: 2,235**

**Vaccinated**:

\-**262,682** (Merck Vaccine)

\-**4,802** (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

### [DRC: inter-ethnic violence in Ituri may constitute “crimes against humanity” – UN report](https://reliefweb.int/report/democratic-republic-congo/drc-inter-ethnic-violence-ituri-may-constitute-crimes-against)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_ReliefWeb, 1/10/20_

Killings, rapes and other forms of violence targeting the Hema community in the Democratic Republic of Congo province of Ituri may amount to crimes against humanity, a UN report released on Friday said. An investigation conducted by the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office in the DRC established that at least 701 people have been killed and 168 injured during inter-ethnic tensions between the Hema and Lendu communities, in the territories of Djugu and Mahagi, from December 2017 to September 2019. In addition, at least 142 people have been subjected to acts of sexual violence, the report said. Most of the victims are members of the Hema community. Since September 2018, Lendu armed groups have increasingly become more organized in carrying out attacks against the Hema and members of other ethnic groups such as the Alur, the investigators said. Among their objectives is to take control of the land of the Hema communities and their associated resources, they added.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by Ahmed Ogwell](https://twitter.com/laktarr001/status/1215645032193122304)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/10/20

As @AfricaCDC we’ve made a significant contribution to controlling the #Ebola outbreak in #DRC. More needs to be done and we remain committed and motivated to complete this task. Our message today to the AU PSC. @AU_PSD @_AfricanUnion @ausocialaffairs

### [Tweet by Seth Berkley](https://twitter.com/GaviSeth/status/1215651346784948224)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/10/20

@GaviSeth

Anthropologist Julienne Anoko has gone to great lengths to improve relationships between communities affected by #Ebola and health care workers. Her commitment to understanding and eliminating mistrust towards responders is truly commendable.