---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (1/9/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for January 9th, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-01-09 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **0 new cases** reported on January 9th.

108 contacts have been reported for yesterday’s confirmed case in Beni, where FARDC soldiers clashed with unknown assailants during attacks on 2 Ebola response facilities. 4 high-risk contacts from a case in Mabalako health district were intercepted at a checkpoint in North Kivu displaying symptoms of Ebola.

### Recommended Reading 

[What Will It Take To Finally End Congo's Ebola Outbreak In 2020?](https://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2020/01/09/794675939/what-will-it-take-to-finally-end-congos-ebola-outbreak-in-2020)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of January 9)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,392**  
\- Confirmed cases: 3,274

\- Probable cases: 118

\- Suspected cases: 520

**Deaths: 2,235**

**Vaccinated**:

\-**262,682** (Merck Vaccine)

\-**4,802** (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

### [Beni reports confirmed # Ebola case after 29 days of silence](https://us3.campaign-archive.com/?u=b34a30571d429859fb249533d&id=008422c2fb)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_MOH DRC, 1/9_

This is a known contact from Aloya-Metal for more than a week, announced the head of the epidemiological surveillance pillar at the Sub-coordination of the response to the epidemic of the Ebola virus disease. Beni in North Kivu, Dr. Bibiche Matadi. He is a 40-year-old man at the CTE in Beni in the Bundji health area, listed as the contact for a deceased and confirmed Ebola case on December 21, 2019 in Mabalako and whose signs started on December 16, 2019. The Beni health zone is again re-infected from the Bundji health area, where the displaced persons from Lwemba and Aloya are placed in search of the vaccine against the Ebola virus. For Dr Bibiche Matadi, this notification is due to the late warning and misinformation in the population camp. She said that a vaccination ring was installed in this health area to limit the spread of the virus. To this end, it called on the population of Bundji to be vaccinated, to facilitate follow-up and all the other activities of the response which will be carried out around this new case of Beni. 108 contacts were pre-listed around this case, including 14 family members, 1 pastor, 55 neighbors, 13 co-patients, 22 visitors and 3 healthcare providers. The contact listing continues.

### [Interception of four high-risk contacts at the Control Point in Kalaunguta in North Kivu](https://us3.campaign-archive.com/?u=b34a30571d429859fb249533d&id=40eaf9fb41)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_MOH DRC, 1/9_

Four high-risk contacts, all from the same family, were intercepted at the Maboya checkpoint in Kalunguta in the province of North Kivu. They are listed around the confirmed case “Ebola of January 06, 2020 in Aloya in the health zone of Mabalako and presented each other the signs of the Ebola virus disease, notably fever, physical asthenia, anorexia, redness of the eyes and cough. They were taken to the Ebola Treatment Center in Mangina. In addition, the disruption of surveillance activities is reported at the Mutsanga and Kyaghala checkpoints in the Katwa health zone, also in North Kivu, following clashes between the FARDC and non-identified individuals.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by Kivu Security](https://twitter.com/KivuSecurity/status/1215237745280417793)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/9

@KivuSecurity

2 facilities of the « riposte » against #Ebola attacked over the last few days in #Beni territory: in Bulema (aka Vulemai) in the night of 6-7 January (4 bodies of assailants found) and in Buhesi (Vuhesi) in the night of 7-8 January. The identity of the assailants remains unknown.

### [Tweet by Helen Branswell](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1215058619433209857)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} 1/9

@HelenBranswell

More news from the #Ebola outbreak in NE DRC. Beni, which had gone 29 days without a case, reported one yesterday. Beni has contained Ebola ... 4-5 times now only to be reinfected when someone infected elsewhere traveled to Beni.