---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (1/6/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for January 6th, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-01-06 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were **2 new cases** reported on January 6th.

Two imported cases are under investigation in Mambasa, which was previously cleared. Across the border, the Ministry of Health of Uganda announces new preparedness measures emphasizing surveillance and response coordination.

### Recommended Reading 

[Ministry of Health Lauds Partners for Support during Ebola Preparedness Response in Uganda](https://reliefweb.int/report/uganda/ministry-health-lauds-partners-support-during-ebola-preparedness-response-uganda)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of January 6) 

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases: 3,386**  
 - Confirmed cases: 3,270  
 - Probable cases: 118

\- Suspected cases: 464

**Deaths: 2,233**

**Vaccinated**:

\-**261,285** (Merck Vaccine)

\-**4,551** (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

## Twitter

### [Tweet by David Gressly](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1213719511876153345)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/6/20

@DavidGressly

The very day it was announced that Mambasa had been free of #Ebola for 21 days, two imported cases were discovered and are now being investigated. We need to remain vigilant at all times. We can’t let our guard down. We can’t let Ebola win. #StopEbola #OnEstEnsemble

### [Tweet by MONUSCO](https://twitter.com/MONUSCO/status/1214184891090386944)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/6/20

@MONUSCO

Offensive of #FARDC against the rebels #ADF around Camp Madina (40 km NE of #Beni ), at #NordKivu : all humanitarian flights for Operation Sukola I have been suspended due to the security situation in the sector.