---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (2/10/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for February 10th, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-02-10 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were 0 **new cases** reported on February 10th.

DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of February 10th)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases:** 3,431

* Confirmed cases: 3,308
* Probable cases: 123
* Suspected cases: 476

**Deaths:** 2,247

**Vaccinated:**

* 291,423 (Merck Vaccine)
* 11,653 (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

[WHO: The Ebola Epidemic in DR Congo May Be Nearing its End](https://www.voanews.com/science-health/who-ebola-epidemic-dr-congo-may-be-nearing-its-end)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_Voice of America, 2/9/20_

The World Health Organization reports progress is being made in combating the Ebola epidemic in the conflict-ridden North Kivu and Ituri provinces in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. WHO's regional director for Africa, Matshidiso Moeti, tells VOA the situation in the country is very different now than it was a few months ago.

“What I can say with a great deal of hope and optimism is that … we are seeing, for example, in a week something like five cases. So, the number of cases per day is very much reduced than they were a few weeks ago, soon after we had some violent attacks and had to stop essentially the interventions in the hotspots in the DRC,” said Moeti. “We are cautiously optimistic that we are reaching the end of this Ebola outbreak. What is very important really is the security aspect. That we have stable security support and that hopefully, as well … violent attacks be addressed, so that they do not continue to be a hindrance to finishing this outbreak,” said Moeti.

[Visit this Sunday of the General Coordinator of the response to the epidemic at the EVD in Butembo](https://mailchi.mp/d0aa972ac650/situation-pidmiologique-du-09-fvrier-2020?e=137f9669b7)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_DRC MOH, 2/9/20_

The General Coordinator of the response to the Ebola virus disease epidemic, Prof Steve Ahuka Mundeke, accompanied by his deputy, Dr Justus Nsio Mbeta and a strong delegation of the general coordination of the response from Goma , carried out this Sunday, February 09, 2020 a mission to Butembo, in the province of North Kivu. The general coordinator of the response, during this meeting, congratulated the response teams of the sub-coordination of Butembo for the work done to keep this city free from Ebola for more than thirty days. To this end, he insisted on maintaining the epidemiological situation while urging response teams to remain more vigilant and rigorous in order to stay on course with zero cases while waiting for the end of the epidemic.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by Helen Branswell](https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell/status/1226672791954640896)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 2/9/20

@HelenBranswell

[#Ebola](https://twitter.com/hashtag/Ebola?src=hashtag_click): Zero new cases, zero new deaths. Only 4 cases in February so far. Fingers crossed.