---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (1/24/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for January 24th, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-01-24 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were 0 **new cases** reported on January 24th.

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of January 24)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases:** 3,416

* Confirmed cases: 3,297
* Probable cases: 119
* Suspected cases: 502

**Deaths:** 2,239

**Vaccinated:**

* 272,822 (Merck Vaccine)
* 7,611 (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

### [Cholera deepens misery in eastern DR Congo's 'forgotten' crisis](https://www.france24.com/en/20200124-cholera-deepens-misery-in-eastern-dr-congo-s-forgotten-crisis)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

France24, 1/24/20

In eastern DR Congo, thousands have fled violence to camps in the remote mountain forests where they battle cholera, hunger and misery in a forgotten humanitarian disaster. Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo has long struggled with violence from several militia groups, a legacy of the 1990s Congo wars that dragged in neighboring Uganda and Rwanda. The region is now also the epicenter of the latest Ebola epidemic, which has killed more than 2,200 people since August 2018. Away from the Ebola headlines, tens of thousands of people are scattered in squalid camps across the mountains around Masisi, where they have fled, traumatized by violence, starving and with no chance to return home. Along with the unsanitary conditions, a lack of clean water and food, since late last year, a cholera and measles outbreak has worsened life in the camps.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by Mike Hammer](https://twitter.com/USAmbDRC/status/1220772003717812225)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/24/20

@USAmbDRC Good to meet w/ @NIH experts working with Congolese @MTamfum & his @inrb_kinshasa team on follow up to the so far effective newly developed treatments for Ebola. Clinical trials continue; such cooperation will defeat this virus. Proud of U.S. contributions. #StopEbola #PP4PP