---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (1/14/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for January 14th, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-01-14 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were 5 **new cases** reported on January 14th.

Healthcare workers came under attack by community members in Lolwa, Ituri leaving 4 injured. The DRC army intervened to extract the victims to safety. Reluctance to engage with Ebola responders continues to reduce participation in vaccine programs across the epidemic region.

Experts express concern as infection returns to previously cleared health zones.

## Recommended Reading

[MSF Crisis update - January 2020](https://www.msf.org/drc-ebola-outbreak-crisis-update)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of January 14)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases:** 3,403

* Confirmed cases: 3,285
* Probable cases: 118
* Suspected cases: 410

**Deaths:** 2,235

**Vaccinated:**

* 265,309 (Merck Vaccine)
* 5,684 (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

### [Attacks on teams of the response to the Ebola epidemic in Bandibwame by the community](https://mailchi.mp/72e002373a2f/situation-pidmiologique-du-13-janvier-2020?e=1faa4d6465)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_DRC MOH, 1/14/20_

Teams of the response to the #Ebola virus disease were attacked this Monday, January 13, 2020 in the Bandibwame health area in Lolwa in the province of Ituri by the community. The incident left 4 injured, 2 of whom were brought back to Lolwa General Hospital and 2 to Mambasa. Among the victims, there is an APS and a response agent committed to dignified and secure burial. In addition, there is community reluctance in the health areas of Biakato Mines and Lwemba in Mandima in Ituri, as well as in those of Aloya, Bingo and Mangina in Mabalako in the province of North Kivu. This reluctance leads to a low participation of people in vaccination. However, 6 vaccination teams committed to the Aloya and Bingo health areas in North Kivu were able to vaccinate 82 people around the confirmed cases from December 26, 2019 to January 6, 2020 in these two health areas.

### [DRC: The military successfully wins the ADF rebel stronghold](https://www.bbc.com/swahili/habari-51092759)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_BBC Swahili, 1/13/20_

Armed forces in the Democratic Republic of Congo say they have succeeded in seizing the rebel stronghold in the eastern part of the country where several attacks have been planned. The Medina camp, located in a forested area and has been used for over two decades by Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) rebels. The occupation of the camp is a major blow to the ADF rebels but the move has also come at a cost to the military. More than 30 soldiers were killed and 70 others seriously injured when government forces clashed violently with the ADF rebels near Beni city in an area hit by the eastern security of the Democratic Republic of Congo.

### [Ebola: concern mounts after virus re-emerges in localities in eastern DRC](https://www.lemonde.fr/afrique/article/2020/01/13/ebola-l-inquietude-monte-apres-la-reapparition-du-virus-dans-des-localites-de-l-est-de-la-rdc_6025695_3212.html)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_Le Monde, 1/13/20_

Ebola is back in Beni, in the North Kivu region, east of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). The World Health Organization (WHO) and the Congolese Ministry of Health, which coordinate the response to the epidemic that started in August 2018, announced on Tuesday January 7 the appearance of a new case of hemorrhagic fever after twenty-nine days of calm. Either beyond the twenty-one days from which an area is considered free of the virus. The 40-year-old man was reportedly infected by a person who died in late December 2019. Resurgence has also been reported in Mambasa, a locality some 100 km to the north, in the neighboring province of Ituri. This time after sixty-six days of respite. "We don't understand. The whole region is surrounded by the Riposte. The population ended up bowing to it and agreed to follow the instructions. Why doesn't it end?" wonders Kaghulalo Honey, who works in an Ebola treatment center in Beni.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by Africa CDC](https://twitter.com/AfricaCDC/status/1216963130087157760)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/14/20

@AfricaCDC

Thanks to the DRC army for rescuing some of our team members who were attacked in Badibwame #DRCongo while supporting response to #Ebola outbreak

### [Tweet by David Gressly](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1217053506978353152)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/14/20

@DavidGressly

We are still facing challenges but we have made enormous progress. We are working together to find solutions. We will not get there without trust in the teams that work every day on the ground. #NotATarget#OnEstEnsemble