---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (1/29/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for January 29th, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-01-29 05:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There was 1 **new case** reported on January 29th.

The CMRE observed the installations of two new laboratories in Goma, North Kivu. These labs are part of an initiative to strengthen health systems of affected areas.

## DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of January 29)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total cases:** 3,421

* Confirmed cases: 3,302
* Probable cases: 119
* Suspected cases: 501

**Deaths:** 2,242

**Vaccinated:**

* 277,729 (Merck Vaccine)
* 8,622 (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)

### [The CMRE Technical Secretary visits the new INRB laboratories installed in Goma](https://mailchi.mp/d901a0b9985b/situation-pidmiologique-du-28-janvier-2020?e=%5bUNIQID%5d)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_DRC MOH, 1/28/20_

The Technical Secretary of the Multisectoral Committee for the Response to the Ebola Virus Disease (CMRE), Prof. Jean-Jacques Muyembe Ntamfum, visited this Tuesday January 28, 2020 the installations of two new laboratories of the INRB installed in Goma, chief town of the province of North Kivu. These laboratories, which will soon be inaugurated, are part of post-epidemic activities, notably the strengthening of the health system in the areas affected by the tenth EVD epidemic in the DRC. Prof. Muyembe has been staying in eastern DRC since January 16, 2020 to inquire about the progress of the activities in response to the Ebola Virus Disease epidemic and the installation works of these laboratories. 'INRB.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by David Gressly](https://twitter.com/DavidGressly/status/1222098883901382656)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} – 1/29/20

@DavidGressly

Ready to roll! Amazing camera crew retelling the story of #Ebola in the #DRC and the great people who made it possible to come down to such a low number of cases today. #OnEstEnsemble @MinSanteRDC @UNICEFDRC @OMSRDCONGO @IMC_Worldwide @PamCongo @MONUSCO