---
keywords:
- Ebola
title: DRC Ebola News (3/9/20)
content_type: news
excerpt: Daily update for March 9th, 2020 on the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DRC)
date: 2020-03-09 04:00:00 +0000
authors: []
series: ''
themes:
- _themes/high-risk-disease-outbreaks.md
image: ''
image_caption: ''
image_credit: ''
pdf: ''
is_commission_related:
  description: ''
  related_event: ''
references: ''

---
There were 0 **new cases** reported on March 9th.

DRC MoH Statistics/WHO AFRO Dashboard (as of March 9th)

[WHO AFRO Dashboard](http://who.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/e70c3804f6044652bc37cce7d8fcef6c)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

**Total Cases:** 3,444

* Confirmed Cases: 3,310
* Probable Cases: 134
* Suspected Cases: 342

**Deaths:** 2,264

**Vaccinated:**

* 3,684 (Johnson & Johnson Vaccine)
* 300,330 (Merck Vaccine)

[DRC Ebola outbreaks: Crisis update - 9 March 2020](https://reliefweb.int/report/democratic-republic-congo/drc-ebola-outbreaks-crisis-update-9-march-2020)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_ReliefWeb, 03/9/2020_

In 2020, the number of cases recorded per week has declined dramatically; the last confirmed case was recorded on 17 February. The situation continues to improve - as of 6 March, no new cases had been recorded for 18 consecutive days - however the outbreak is not yet over and there is a continued need for vigilance.

[Congo-Kinshasa: Seven Factors That Turned Round the DRC's Ebola Outbreak](https://allafrica.com/stories/202003090069.html)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}

_All Africa, 03/8/2020_

Those managing the outbreak in the DRC aren't completely letting their guard down - just yet. Forty-six individuals who had come into contact with the last patient are still being monitored. In addition, all Ebola control and response measures are still in place to ensure that any new cases are detected quickly and treated. A great number of very useful lessons have come out of the trauma of the past 19 months. In my view there were seven key interventions and developments. These included the development of safe and efficient Ebola vaccines. So too was improving diagnostics that can be used easily in less resourced and remote areas. And, importantly, learning that control of a disease outbreak like Ebola is impossible without community trust and engagement.

## Twitter

### [Tweet by WHO AFRO](https://twitter.com/WHOAFRO/status/1237072470441635845)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”}– 3/9/20

@WHOAFRO

Women are vulnerable to [#Ebola](https://twitter.com/hashtag/Ebola?src=hashtag_click), largely because they care for the sick. [@WHO](https://twitter.com/WHO)<i/>{:class=”icon-external-link”}{:target=”_blank”}{:rel=”noopener”} celebrated [#WomensDay](https://twitter.com/hashtag/WomensDay?src=hashtag_click) with female survivors, who said: “When a man is sick, a woman takes care of him. When a woman is sick, it’s also a woman who takes care of her. Let’s applaud all of these women."