---
title: Alicia Carbaugh
short_title: Senior Associate, CSIS Global Health Policy Center
image: https://res.cloudinary.com/csisideaslab/image/upload/v1669844638/health-commission/5Carbaugh_gm00kk.jpg

---
Alicia L. Carbaugh is a senior associate (non-resident) with the Global Health Policy Center at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), contributing to its work on HIV, pandemic preparedness, and immunizations. Alicia is a global health policy expert, with more than 15 years in the HIV space, whose work has included research, analysis, and program implementation efforts. She previously served as an associate director of the Global Health and HIV Policy program at the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF), a leading nonpartisan health policy research organization. She was a principal architect of the program and was integral to the development of its framework, strategy, and analytic portfolio on the U.S. government’s global health response. Most recently, she spearheaded a multi-year effort examining the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) to inform the discourse on its role and future amid the Covid-19 pandemic. For more than a decade, Alicia has advised Project C.U.R.E., an NGO supporting health service delivery globally, where she conducts needs assessments of health facilities and communities in Africa, Asia, and the Caribbean to guide program implementation. Through this work, Alicia has engaged a range of global health stakeholders—including national and local health authorities, NGOs, private sector entities, and donor governments—and deepened her understanding of the intricacies of health systems and roles of donor assistance. Alicia has counseled a variety of organizations advancing global and U.S. health initiatives, including serving on the board of Funders Concerned About AIDS. She holds a master’s degree from the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.