---
title: Carolyn Reynolds
date: '2018-09-13T15:17:47.000+00:00'
short_title: Senior Associate, CSIS Global Health Policy Center
image: https://res.cloudinary.com/csisideaslab/image/upload/v1605899666/health-commission/Carolyn_Reynolds_Headshot.jpg

---
Carolyn Reynolds is a senior associate with the Global Health Policy Center at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) and an expert adviser to the CSIS Commission on Strengthening America’s Health Security. She is co-founder of the Pandemic Action Network, a network of 140+ organizations around the world whose mission is to drive collective action to end Covid-19 and ensure the world is better prepared for future pandemics. She is also a distinguished fellow with The George Institute for Global Health and a consultant to international organizations including the Global Financing Facility for Women, Children and Adolescents, World Bank Group, World Health Organization, and the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board. Previously she was vice president for policy and advocacy at PATH, an international nonprofit organization supporting health innovation in developing countries, where she led a multinational team to shape evidence-based policies and mobilize political will and resources for women’s and children’s health, global health security, and global health research and development. She also served as manager for external and corporate relations at the World Bank Group, where she led strategic communications and advocacy for global health and human development, including the Bank’s efforts to respond to the 2014-16 Ebola crisis in West Africa. Earlier, she served as a founding board member and managing director of the U.S. Global Leadership Campaign, legislative director for InterAction, and legislative aide and acting director of the Senate Foreign Relations Africa subcommittee for the late Senator Paul Simon (D-IL). Ms. Reynolds holds a master’s in international affairs with a concentration in economic and political development from Columbia University and a bachelor’s of arts with a major in foreign affairs from the University of Virginia.