---
title: Thomas R. Cullison
date: '2019-08-15T15:20:49.000+00:00'
short_title: Senior Associate, CSIS
image: https://res.cloudinary.com/csisideaslab/image/upload/v1605899666/health-commission/Tom_Cullison_Headshot.jpg

---
Dr. Thomas Cullison is a senior associate with the Global Health Policy Center at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. During his 38-year naval career, culminating as deputy surgeon general of the Navy, he was active in disaster management, international health engagement, graduate medical education, and health policy. He has contributed to numerous CSIS Global Health Policy Center programs and remained active in Department of Defense contributions to health security. His Navy career began as a surface warfare and saturation diving officer. Dr. Cullison received his doctor of medicine degree in 1979 from the Indiana University School of Medicine; completed orthopedic surgery residency at Naval Medical Center, San Diego; and served in a variety of clinical assignments involving direct patient care, graduate medical education, and operational deployments. His Navy Medicine leadership career began in San Diego as surgeon general specialty leader for orthopedic surgery and director of surgical services. He later served as deputy commander, Naval Medical Center Portsmouth; commanding officer, Naval Hospital Camp Lejeune; fleet surgeon, U.S. Pacific Fleet; command surgeon U.S. Pacific Command; medical officer of the Marine Corps; commander, Naval Medical Center Portsmouth; and commander, Naval Medicine East. He held academic appointments at the University of California San Diego School of Medicine and the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences. He is a fellow of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, the Society of Military Orthopaedic Surgeons, and the American Orthopaedic Association.